ne (Libanon Gold Mine) to become anEngineer in Training, which was incredibly good practical experienceand exposure. At the age of 22 (1973), I married my girlfriendAntonette, and we stayed on the mine property. Over the next 4years, we had two girls and a boy whilst I completed my Engineer-in-Training period. This training assisted me in applying for andobtaining a good engineering job at the chemical giant AECI inSasolburg, which was successful. Another reason for me leavingmining was the fact that my dad died from a lung disease after allthe time underground in the mine. The time at the chemical company was an incredible experience fora young engineer as the plant operated 24 / 7 every week, itbrought severe pressure to my personal life due to the time spent atwork. However, it was a wonderful experience and great exposure. Iwas one of fifteen engineers at AECI. I was appointed manager ofthe VCM plant. After 3 years, I was given the job of supervising the repair of one of our leaking reactors in Germany. This was a wonderful experience 11

as I was fortunate to attend the initial meetings with seniorengineers of AECI to agree on the required specifications for thisreactor repair. We then went to Germany to agree on theprocedure with the Germans in Dusseldorf and Munich. I stayedbehind in Germany for the next few months to execute this repair ata selected German Company. The pressure was severe as AECI was losing big money every daywith the reactor out of service. With this knowledge, I convincedthe Germans to work night shift on this job. The job was done 30days early, saving R30 million, back in the eighties. I contacted AECISouth Africa with this good news, which I kept a secret until it wascompleted. You can imagine the welcome I had when I returned toSouth Africa earlier than expected. The company surprised me witha big welcoming party. After that successful outcome, additional responsibilities came myway, and I was appointed as technical manager of the cyanide andperoxide plants of AECI and the VCM plant. I managed to sort outthe serious issues that caused lots of downtime on the cyanideplant, as it was a strategic site due to supplying cyanide to the goldmines in the process of gold extraction. My corrective actionincreased output by 50%, which allowed an adequate supply ofcyanide to the gold mines. The experience at AECI was priceless.After completing several cost-reduction projects, I recognised mystrong analytical skills. 12

One Sunday, I happened to scroll through the job section of ourlocal Sunday newspaper and came across a job vacancy for aCompany Engineer in the largest pharmaceutical company inSouth Africa – Adcock Ingram. I was incredibly happy at AECI butdecided (as a joke) to apply for this Job. It was a major shock tome when I got the call for an interview at Adcock Ingram. Idecided to go for the interview more out of curiosity, as you canimagine, I could not leave AECI, especially after the recentGerman project and promotion. However, I went for the interview and was surprised at how well itwent, especially due to my AECI experience, which counted in my favor. I did not realise that AECI was recognised as such an important benchmark in business. I was driving in my car, back to my office just after the interview, when I received a call from Adcock Ingram and they offered me the Job. I got such a fright that I declined the Job and returned to AECI. Back in my office, I received another call, this time with an offer that I knew I could not decline. I then communicated to the AECI executive that I was resigning, which was a big shock to them in light of my recent successful trip to Germany. They tried everything possible to retain my services, but I made up my mind. I was then working for AECI for a 13

period of 5 Years. Also, at Adcock Ingram Pharmaceuticals, I wouldbe the only Company Engineer. During this period, my mother died a year after my father at an early age of 54, compared to my father, who died at 63 years. She could not live without him. During my time pursuing new careers, my lovely wife had the tough task of raising our 3 kids. Another boy was born 7 years after ouryoungest child. We were blessed, we had a Family of 2 boys and 2girls in our twenties and enjoying a successful career. In the end, I had a very successful career of 14 years at Adcock Ingram. I was extremely fortunate to have been allowed to rebuild/design a new layout for the packing plant. The company then sent me to Germany to be trained on the latest sterile equipment that we purchased for our sterile division. I came back and trained all the technical staff. I went to Boston in the USA where I was trained on a reverseosmosis plant that we purchased to improve the water quality inour sterile division. After a phenomenally successful period at thepharmaceutical plant, I was promoted to Technical Director andgiven responsibility for the Consumer division as well. The totalsupply chain was added to my new role, i.e., Distribution,Production, Procurement, etc.  14

My MD called me in and sent me to Scotland to investigate thepossibility of installing the Jeyes Blue line in South Africa, as wewere importing the product. I installed this new Plant in SouthAfrica the following year, which enabled us to produce the productat a much lower price locally. The continuous development and innovation were enormous at Adcock Ingram, as I witnessed continuous new product launches. The manufacturing discipline that was required in a pharmaceutical factory required good manufacturing disciplines as we were producing products that could kill people, hence proper validations and good housekeeping were paramount. I learned to apply the Japanese culture of “full proof”, No mistakes called “Poka-Yoke”, as mistakes are not allowed in the pharmaceutical process. This focus will assist you in your future career, as mistakes in business can be costly. Between career challenges, I developed into a top tennis player, winning numerous tournaments. I also became a 3 handicap golfer, playing tournaments all over South Africa. At a later age, I also became the Alberton Tennis and Squash Champion in one year, which was an outstanding achievement at the age of 36. Focusing on 3 types of sports was not easy, and today I regret thehours I spent away from my wife and children playing sports.  15

I must apologise to my wife and children today for being absent. Iwould advise young people to focus on fewer sports to restore andmaintain a good family life balance while being married. During myfirst trip to Germany, I started coaching the factory staff for 2months as I was the Vaal Triangle Tennis Champion in South Africa. There were hours of hard work and discipline to achieve these sporting results. However, the discipline required to train hard was also evident in my success at work. I was also fortunate to work for incredibly good bosses who were also my mentors and assisted in my early development. 16Motivation gets you going, butdiscipline keeps you growing.-John C. MaxwellDiscipline is doing what needsto be done, even if you don’twant to do it.

Career Continuation In the meantime, my Career / Business life progressed extremelywell. I was always very goal-driven to achieve the best, whichstood me in good stead as superior results meant good salaryincreases. I think that the competitiveness in sports assisted metremendously to also be competitive in my job and always strivefor the best, i.e., meeting agreed KPI’s. I hope young people take this lesson to heart that you must believe in your uniqueness and know that, with faith in our Heavenly Father, you can achieve great things. These experiences over 14 years set me up for future career developments, as South African executives were aware of my success at Adcock Ingram and AECI. The boss at Adcock Ingram was a great mentor to me, not just teaching me technical skills, but also trusting me in giving me more and more oppo