rtunities locally and abroad. I was, however, surprised to be contacted and headhunted by the Chairman of a big export group who offered me the position of Managing Director in Port Elizabeth, South Africa, after 14 years 17

with Adcock Ingram and no plans to change companies. He made itclear to me that, based on my success at Adcock Ingram, he wasmaking me an offer. I was then 42 Years old. Again, I had my doubtsabout leaving Adcock Ingram as I was extremely happy in thecompany, but the offer was of such a nature that I had to accept it.This took me to the ultimate position of Managing Director in alarge group, which is logical based on my career achievements atthat stage. I felt immensely proud as I realised that I had progressed from theyoung apprentice boilermaker to Managing Director.Unfortunately, we had to leave 2 Children behind in JHB to move toPort Elizabeth, a decision that we regretted later. The move to PortElizabeth was also traumatic, hence away from the Family inGauteng. The new job was incredibly challenging as it involved total exports to Italy, France, Japan, Malaysia, and Europe. The Managing Director in this business makes all the key decisions on quality, procurement and selling prices. He also oversaw key negotiations with key suppliers in South Africa and overseas. Everything I knowabout negotiations I learned at this company is that I had tonegotiate all over the world. I was away from home frequently,but fortunately, my wife was able to join me on occasional trips. 18

The 5 years with the group were good learning as I had the totalmanagement team reporting to me, hence good financial and globalmarket experience. Purchasing was especially important as we hadto buy all our raw materials from the local farmers, which were the”Dorper” sheep skins. The leather fairs were held in Paris, France,twice a year. Once finally tanned in Europe, these skins were sold astop-quality Leather garments across the world. The company wasunfortunately sold to the larger opposition after 5 years, and we gotoffered good severance packages, which I accepted. This meant that we had to return to Gauteng to a happy Family. The biggest Food Company in South Africa, Tiger Brands, recruited me to manage their edible oil business, SA Oil Mills in Randfontein in Gauteng. The company was owned 50/50 by Tiger Brands and Senwes, a Farmers co-op. Tiger Brands wanted to exit commodity businesses, hence joined forces with Senwes, to transform the business back to profitability to maximise the selling price. The key objective was my responsibility, and I had to prepare a “blue Paper” for this business transformation. Two weeks later, I submitted my findings/ proposals, which the company, Senwes, accepted immediately and became the holding Company as they purchased Tiger Brands 50%. The proposal included a Capex of 10 million rand to enable automation of the packing operation, which was very labor-intensive and was approved. In summary, Tiger Brands and 19

Senwes’ edible oil plants were operating separately, hence totalduplication of operations, i.e., a crushing (Crude oil) plant atSenwes and Tiger Brands, Refineries at Senwes and Tiger andseparate oil packing operations. This situation led me to make asimple proposal to rationalise all operations, i.e. One Crude oilplant at Senwes and one refinery at Tiger Brands, with one newautomated packing operation at Tiger Brands. This meant seriousstaff reduction, and we had to follow an ethical retrenchmentprocess. I had the privilege to manage this total process, which achieved all the goals in my blueprint. I have met the cost reduction target, and the Indian consortium Continental Oils bought the company from Senwes.. I chose not to work for the new Company due to a different culture. However, Senwes afforded me a good package for my efforts. This was the start of my Business Transformation focus up until today. My overseas exposure blessed me with the ability to see the big picture. Today, I can walk into any business and my analysis will indicate major improvements and cost savings. Based on the great export exposure with my previous company I was recruited back to Adcock Ingram to become Director of Exports into Africa, Europe and the Far East. I was part of a small team with export sales not significant. My knowledge of the Adcock Ingram 20

products made this a logical move. I then persuaded the TigerBrands management to put all products into one basketinclusive of Adcock Ingram who at that stage was part of TigerBrands. My total export basket then consisted ofpharmaceuticals, food products, and Beacon Sweetsconfectionary products. Three years later we grew into a muchlarger export company based on focus on one export company.Again, I enjoyed the exposure and I was also selling TigerBrands products, the biggest food company in South Africa.Confectionary was a big part of them. It gave me a massiverange of products to sell over the next few years with manyoverseas trips. I travelled extensively to Africa, Europe and the Far East. I alsosold products in Cyprus Greece very successfully.Unfortunately, the local market grew at such a pace that thelocal factories were unable to supply our export salesconsistently, which throttled the export business. It wasobvious that local companies received preference. The marketsthat I established died as we could not supply products to ourcustomers until the RSA factories increased their capacitieswhich would take too long. I decided to leave the export business for this reason and started using my expertise in transforming companies and I Joined a company called Retailer Brands to do this. After transforming this company, I was asked to join a confectionary group in East London 21

South Africa called Candy Tops to transform them. I joined them asTechnical Director. This was one of the very few negative moves inmy career, as I realized that the candy product margins wereextremely small, and we had to be very smart to make a profit.However, this gave me great confectionary exposure and theexposure to work for a loss-making company for the 1st time whichI would need in my future career. Candy Tops merged with their sister Company Mr. Sweet; hence it closed the East London operations and some products were transferred to Mr. Sweet in JHB. I was offered a package which I accepted. However, my confectionary experience stood me in good stead as I was contacted again by Tiger Brands in South Africa. Their confectionary businesses had serious problems after a failed project installation with a cost of R 200 million, and they recruited me on a contract basis to rectify the problems and restore the factory performance. They could not get the main gums & jellies line called a mogul to operate at the desired efficiency. I installed a real-time production monitoring system to measure the performance  24/7. It took me 6 months to restore this line successfully. I was recruited for a period of 6 months but stayed for a period of 4 Years and was promoted to head up the supply chainat the confectionery business after all the success. This was an 22

intensive study in which I applied Pareto technology to identify the20% that caused 80% of the problems. I not only rectified theirproblems but also improved productivity in all the confectionaryplants in the gums & jellies division. I am very proud to say that itwas a very successful contract period with great results and myrelationship with this group continued at a later stage. At that stage the Tiger Brands executive who recruited me to Tiger Brands became the Supply Chain Director of a beverage company called BEVCO in Johannesburg and at the end of my contract heasked me to come and assist him with this beverage company.Again, I immediately got involved in transforming the company andmade improvements as the beverage business is also verycompetitive, hence cost savings via improved productivity improvements were critical. I spent a