test

--- Extracted from upload: Final draft June From apprentice Boilermaker to Managing Director (002).pdf ---
Phil De Jager Rising fromRising fromApprentice toApprentice toManaging DirectorManaging Director  – My journey of growth and leadership 

© Phil de Jager 2025 South Africa.Publisher: www.sakurabookpublishing.comalta@sakurabookpublishing.comCover design: Alta H HaffnerISBN:                                    (print)                                             (e-book)All rights reserved. No part of this publicationmay be reproduced, distributed, or transmittedin any form or any means, includingphotocopying, recordings, or other electronic ormechanical methods without the prior writtenpermission of the author and publisher, except inthe case of brief quotations embodied in criticalreviews and certain noncommercial usespermitted by copyright law.

CONTENTSCONTENTSAbout Phil de JagerForewordEarly homelife and formative yearsStudy commencement Early career / sportCareer ContinuationOverseas ExposureManagement styleSporting careerIndustries I have worked inBusiness Learnings / Life ChallengesGood Business QuotesKey focus areas and life learnings Conclusion / SummaryTestimonials45791117273242485062647881

About Phil de JagerAbout Phil de JagerPhil De Jager is an accomplished business leader withover five decades of experience across the engineering,pharmaceutical, food, and manufacturing industries. Fromhis humble beginnings as an apprentice to becoming aManaging Director. Phil has led major businessturnarounds, international expansions, and strategictransformations. His passion for leadership, resilience,and people development is at the heart of his memoir,offering a compelling journey of growth and inspiration.4 

Foreword This book attempts to convince young and older people thatanything is possible if you believe in yourself. Don’t be swayed bywhere you come from, your poor childhood, your background, oranything that would deter progress or success. It is amazing whatcan be achieved via a positive mindset and focus. Decide what you would like to achieve early in life, so to be clear onpossible goals for your life. Based on the benefits of social mediaplatforms, research on poor or good careers and Companies towork for is easily accessible. So do some homework to make thebest possible decision early in life. I was just told what to do and didit with some regrets later, but that did not deter me from changingmy career. Remember it is your career, and you must take charge ofyour life while listening and acting on the best advice. The decisions you make could have long-lasting value. In my case,where I just completed a very successful contract at a big companyat the age of 73 and I can’t wait to start the next project. I had manychallenges, i.e. Friends distractions. Fortunately, I resisted peerpressure and focused on my studies and career. 5

I had a solid work ethic. A lesson I learned early in life was to beconsistent on a daily basis. Consistency leads to great success. I was always curious and willing to learn. I focused on improving my skills continuously. “The difference between the impossible and thepossible lies in a man's determination.” Tommy Lasorda Nothing is impossible, the worditself says I’M POSSIBLE.~ Aubrey Hepburn6

Early homelife andformative years My Dad was a miner, I was his youngest son and child of fivesiblings. It was the culture of the day that the sons should followin their dad's footsteps and also work on the mine which mybrother and I did. My older brother became an apprentice Boilermaker and after 5 years, passed his trade test whereafter hebecame a qualified Artisan. I was encouraged by his degree ofsuccess and stability and achievement. At the age of 16, I decidedto leave school, and like my brother, I became an apprenticeBoilermaker. It was possible at the age of 16 to do anapprenticeship. I had a poor upbringing as Miners did not earn much money and we stayed in semi-detached mine houses. We also moved from house to house in the same town. My mother and father were remarkably simple down-to-earth people with very little excitementin their lives. I respected them and loved them dearly. It was mostlywork and sleep every day. As the youngest by 7 years, my siblingsall left home and got married whilst I was a young boy living withmy Parents. My Mother was a very industrious stay-at-home parentand my dad spent most of his life underground as a miner. 7

My dad was a devoted Christian. We went to church every Sunday,which stood me in good stead until today, which my wife and Iconveyed to all our children. My dad was more outgoing, but mymother was a shy introvert. However, with an incredibly lowincome, it was amazing how they gave us a normal upbringing. Thissituation motivated me to be more successful and not to strugglelike my parents. They were extremely trustworthy people. As mentioned, I started working at the Sub Nigel gold Mine as an apprentice Boilermaker at the age of sixteen. (Still a young boy).However, this proved to be a good thing later in my life as I realisedquickly that I was not going to remain a Boilermaker and work likethis for the rest of my life. I soon decided that I was unique and did not have to follow in mydad’s footsteps of work in those terrible conditions, crawlingaround like a dog underground whilst inhaling dangerous dust,which killed him far too early. Fortunately, I excelled in all forms of sport as a young boy, which allowed me to become a top athlete later. The discipline required to be a top athlete also helped in my working career and studieslater. 8

 It is important to study to make progress in life, and it is beneficial for young people to recognize the value of dedicating some time to their education. Remember studying is a once-off event for a “fairly” brief time, but the benefits are lifelong. Witnessing the tough life of my parents motivated me to start my Engineering studies with the assistance of Mine management whilst serving my apprenticeship. I made particularly substantial progress and passed every term. I worked as hard as I could to show that I was not just a good Boilermaker, but also a goodstudent.Studycommencement “Although I enjoyed my job as a Boilermaker and the hand skills itgave me, I had bigger ambitions.”9You become what you study.-Robert T. Kiyosaki

I realised earlier that to be successful; I had to study as hard as Icould. Fortunately, I had a mother who pushed me, waking meearly in the morning, to succeed in my studies. The studies wentso well that by the age of nineteen, I reached the highest level ofmy engineering grades. I qualified after only 3 years to take mytrade test, which I did and passed with excellence, whichconfirmed that I was a top-class Boilermaker. Soon afterqualifying as a Boilermaker Artisan (age 19), I obtained myMechanical Engineering Diploma. I was the youngest artisan on the mine to obtain a diploma at theage of twenty as a qualified artisan. I was also the 1stBoilermaker to obtain a diploma in engineering. My dad wascalled from underground one morning to attend my diplomaceremony presented by the mine management. You can imaginehow proud he was of his son standing there, being a miner andbeing honoured. It was a day that I will never forget. I then knewthat I was unique and destined for bigger things than being aBoilermaker for the rest of my life. It is a lesson that youngpeople should learn. You must believe that you are unique andcan achieve remarkable things with the help of our HeavenlyFather. In later years, I completed a diploma in company direction and passed all final-year subjects of an International MBA. I also did an intensive MBA short course at the University of Cape Town – UCT.I need to mention that my future wife assisted me throughout mystudies and encouraged me tremendously.  10

Early career / Sport The engineer's diploma changed my life, and the mine managementtransferred me to another mi