orld. During this time, I also started playing Golf and became a 3-handicap player within 2 years. My best tournament score was71. Gross score at the Macau vlei Golf course in Vereeniging where Iwon the competition. I was also fortunate to play on the worldrenowned Glen Eagles course in Scotland. The 2014 Ryder Cup was played on that course. In my late 20's due to being a good tennis player I started playing squash and excelled rapidly as I enjoyed the speed of the game and the associated fitness. At that stage, I was the Alberton tennis champion for a few years. One night after a game of squash the top players were discussing who was going to be the squash champion later that year. Very bravely I threw my hat in the mix with the prediction that I would win both the Tennis and Squash titles of Alberton Clubs in that year. This prediction was a bit presumptuous as I was the no. 44 player on the ladder at the squash club. I am using this story to show you young people that if you put your mind to something (even the impossible) it can be achieved. 42

Without going into too much detail I started doing roadworki.e. jogging and sprinting for the next few months before theChampionships in September of 87. The Tennis championshipwas 1st and I won it comfortably as I was extremely fit trainingmainly for the Squash championship. During that year I improved my position on the squash ladder from 44 to the top ten. A few weeks later I was crowned the new Alberton squash Champion after the Tennis title and my wish came true. A lesson to many out there that you can achieve anything you put tour mind to. Some of my Saturdays consisted of squash from 6 to 7 am Saturday mornings, thereafter 18 holes of Golf from 8 am to 1 pm and then 1st league Tennis that afternoon. However, this sports discipline as indicated stood me in good stead in my business career where I could apply the same discipline, dedication and competitiveness. I also think this has a lot to do with the fact that I am still managing big companies as a Transformation Specialist at the age of 73 and still achieving great results. 43

44What you do today can improve all yourtomorrows.-Ralph MarstonSelf-discipline starts with the mastery ofyour thoughts. If you don’t control what youthink, you can’t control what you do.-Napoleon Hill

 Unique Life moments  The day I got married to my lovely wife Antonette The Days when each of children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren were born. Presented Mr. Mandela with a cheque for his 75th birthdaycelebrations in Port Elizabeth.Spent an evening with ex-Protea Captain Hansie Cronje as he wasour speaker for the evening Spent a day on the Great Wall of China.45Discipline is the bridge betweengoals and accomplishments.-Jim Rohn

I was taken through the Murray Field Scotland and their Rugbyclubhouse and stood in the center of the field. Played 18 holes of Golf on the famous Ryder Cup GleneaglesGolf course in Scotland. Being taken to a Tennis tournament in a Pontiac Firebird by anAmerican Family. Scoring a hole-in-one at the Vereeniging Country Club andwinning a Golf competition with a score of 71 gross from an 8handicap at Macau Vlei Golf Club. The day when my dad joined me in congratulations on passing myTrade test and was awarded an Engineering diploma by the Mineexecutive.Passing the MBA final year exam. Trips to Germany, Scotland, England, Italy, France, Holland, China,Japan, Korea, Boston USA, Malaysia, Taiwan, Singapore, HongKong, Bali, Phuket Thailand, Kenya, Zimbabwe, Zambia, Ghana,Botswana, Mozambique, Zanzibar, Cyprus. Many with my lovelywife. A Weekend visit to the Isle of Capri in Italy. Attended a Church service with my son Philip at Yonggi Chochurch in South Korea. Spending time with my two sons in China / Korea.  Attended the 1995 Rugby World Cup win at Ellispark with myManagement team as MD 46

Seeing my daughters and sons winning Tennis tournaments. The day I returned to Tiger Brands in Durban and saw the staffcelebrating my return. The day when Lizel was saved during a serious car accident andPhilip was hit by a car and Charlene survived a bomb scare whilstin a day clinic and also saved me from a serious incident at AECI. The day my youngest son Anton was chosen to play squash forSouth Africa and became a prefect at the High School. The day Anton’s life was saved after a horrific car accident. The quality of my mother and my Wife’s food-making ability. The day when I gave my heart to my lord Jesus, and he savedme. The weekly communications with my brother for more than 50Years. I ran 5 km in 19 minutes and 30 seconds training for the squashchampionship. 47

Industries I have worked in My career path was extremely interesting as described. See below the list of different businesses from start to current : Gold Mines as Engineer in Training – JHB – 5 Years Chemical Plant – AECI as Engineer on projects – JHB – Engineer     – 5 Years Pharmaceuticals/Consumer Products– Adcock Ingram laboratories– JHB – Technical Director – 14 Years  Sunflower oil – SA Oil Mills – JHB – OPS Director – 4 Years Leather Production and total exports – Kolosus – Port Elizabeth    – Managing Director – 4 Years Consumer Products exports – Adcock Ingram / Tiger Brands –Director Exports – 2 Years Consumable products ( Soups ) - Retailer Brands – JHB - OPSDirector – 1 Year Confectionary products – Candy Tops – East London – OPSDirector.- 4 Years Confectionary Products – Tiger Brands – Durban – Ops Director –2 Years Beverage – BEVCO - JHB – Ops Director – 1 Year 48

Confectionary ( All Plants) – Tiger Brands – Durban – Ops Director.- 1 year Tiger Brands Black Cat peanut butter plant – Randfontein– JHB - Ops Director - 1 year Supply Chain head -Future life – Durban – Powder porridges– (Current) – 17 Months You will notice that towards the end of my career, my durationat companies were short due to the contract periods appointedto do business transformation. 49

Business Learnings / Life Challenges: Do a proper investigation into the Company you would like towork for i.e. Workplace safety, People culture, location, Producttypes, Financial stability, Management style, Incentives, etc. Working for a loss-making company can be very negative as thegeneral thinking is one of cost-cutting and not growth. The Company must add value to your career.When you leave a company remember the grass is not alwaysgreener on the other side, hence you must leave for good reasonsand do your homework.Determine whether the Management style is “Command &Control” i.e. micromanagement or they have a “Thrust & Inspire”style. This can influence your progress in a Company as someManagement styles will not allow you to innovate or develop.Determine whether companies do have development programsfor you so that you grow in every Company where you work.Analyze your Company fully so that you understand the totalbusiness. In this way, you can add value to the business.50

 Identify companies that might allow you overseas exposure andexperience. This exposure will stand you in good stead as your global mindsetdevelops. Join companies that are stable, and where you can see your futuredevelopment. Ensure that you grow your business knowledge/experience in everyCompany you work for. Surround yourselves with the “right” people to assist you. If youtrust and inspire these people, your results will be excellent.51Ability is what you’re capable of doing.Motivation determines what you do.Attitude determines how well you do it.-Lou Holtz

 Don’t “carry” people that don’t want to improve, (even aftertraining ) . The wrong person will take up a great percentage of yourmanagement time. Incentivize staff, if possible, to achieve urgent goals. The cost of doing things must always be self-funding.Decide whether you want to work for a big corporate company(maybe more security, but more controls and “red” tape) or for asmaller company where your inputs might be valued more, butpossibly less security.Hire effective