 few years under contract with this company and achieved all my goals. I was then contacted by Tiger Brands to become the Supply Chain Director for a contract period. I was given the responsibility of all confectionary plants including gums & jellies, candy and  chocolate plants. This job had big responsibilities with a workforce of 1400 wages and 40 management staff reporting to me. I did not have to worry too much about the gums & jellies plant as I transformed it during my time there as I described earlier. 23

My focus shifted to the candy and chocolate operations withchocolate being the important one from a profitability point of view. I had an unbelievable 14 Months, transforming these plants successfully and I was awarded a full bonus at the end of mystay. Productivity was improved, food safety standards were met and improved, and we retained all required quality certifications. Housekeeping was upgraded and it was like walking through a good hospital. The people were collaborating extremely well as they enjoyed my management style of “Trust and Inspire” not “Command and Control.” A highlight in my career was the staff jumping up and down and celebrating my return. It was incredible. I also installed a Real-time production monitoring system “to measure OEE’s - Overall Equipment Efficiency. At the end of this contract, Tiger Brands asked me to transform their Black Cat peanut butter plant. This was a very interesting assignment as I managed to not only transform the business like the other ones, but they had a product processing problem linked to the quality of raw materialsthat I sorted out and the output from this plant increasedtremendously. All standards as implemented at Tiger Brands plantswere implemented in the Peanut Butter plant. Another verysuccessful contract period and full bonus paid. 24

Just note all this work was done as a contractor as I have now beenworking 8 years after my retirement age (65) and I am now 73 yearsold. I learned the importance of “word of mouth” contacts Thelesson is that you are never too old to be successful if you producequality work. I was then headhunted by a Company in the Powder cereal business called Future Life. This is a company that has been growing by 10 to 20 % per annum in the last ten years. They had to move from the old premises that became too small to a new site in Durban. They then required new expertise to assist with the “new” business. Their old site did not comply with food safety standards and many standards were lacking. I relished the new 17 Months contract which allowed me to exercise my full experience within this business. I just had the most successful contract period with the business and the results improved tremendously with massive bottom-line savings and profitability improvement. I also installed a real-time production monitoring system which simplifies the operation tremendously. Production capacity was identified as a major problem as the plantworked 6 days a week. I installed a new high-speed packing linewhich now allowed us to only work 4 days a week, hence majorlabor savings. Our food safety standards were upgraded and productivity improved. I just completed my contract at the end of  March.25

Who knows what is next! I am establishing my own BusinessTransformation Company via LinkedIn to reach many influentialleaders who can contact me for business transformation projects.I also have superb testimonies that will stand me in good stead. It should be mentioned that I was responsible for industrial relations with all these companies, making great experience in theannual wage negotiations. Another important issue is the one of relationship building as in your future career, you might have to lean on some of these relationships forged early in your career. I also made sure that I finished off on a high note at every companyI worked for as you could one day need them again. You also leave agood legacy with each company. 26

Overseas exposure I was very fortunate to travel abroad many times for businessrelated issues. During my early career with AECI, I was sent to Germany to fix one of the main reactors for a few months. It was great to experience new technology in Germany, hence expanding my engineering mindset and knowledge. Adcock Ingram then sent me to Boston in the USA to select and purchase a new Reverse Osmosis plant for our sterile division where we needed RO water. They also sent me to Germany to purchase new sterile machinery to upgrade our technology. At a later stage, I then trained all the technical staff before the new machines arrived. Adcock Ingram sent me to The Jeyes operation in East Kilbride Scotland to copy their Plant in South Africa which I completed very successfully and produced a better plant than in Scotland. As part of a business transformation at a company called Continental Oils I went to Italy to commission equipment that I bought for the company to reduce costs via a major laborproductivity upgrade.27

The project was so successful that the ompany changed from a lossto a profit situation. My time as Managing Director of Kolosus Holdings took me on many overseas trips i.e. Korea, China, Malaysia, Italy, France etc. Back at Adcock Ingram, I was appointed as Export Director for Africa and Asia. I conducted several trips to Africa and Asia and our export Sales improved by 200% year on year. I started a new business in Cyprus in Greece where I sold key Tiger Brands products. I was also invited by a Korean Pharmaceutical company to assess their new Pharmaceutical Plant in Korea. All these overseas trips were incredible as I could apply manyof the learnings in our local market to the benefit of the Companies that I upgraded. Today I am extremely grateful to my lovely wife of 51 years who had to look after the children during all my overseas trips and sporting activities. She had a lot to do with improving my discipline, persistence and dedication to being successful. Her constant prayers and unselfishness are something I can never appreciate enough. She had a lot to do with the disciplined upbringing ofour children and constant relationship with God which is themost important thing to all of us. He made all things possible. Ican strongly advise young management to get overseasexposure as it broadens your benchmark standards.  28

29Phil & Antonette de JagerPhil & Antonette de Jager

 Countries and Cities visitedfor Business and Holidays Germany – Munich, Dusseldorf and Krefeld USA – Boston France – Paris. Italy – Rome, Capri, Venice, Solofra, Napoli Holland - Amsterdam, Vollendam Scotland – East Killbride, England – Londen, Manchester Greece – Cyprus Zimbabwe - Harare Angola – Luanda Ghana – Acra China – Shanghai, Beijing Korea – Seoul Japan – Tokyo, Kobe Singapore. Taiwan Malaysia – Kuala Lumpur Thailand – Bangkok Mauritius Namibia / Botswana MozambiqueZanzibar 30

31A leader is best when peoplebarely know he exists. Whenhis work is done, his aimfulfilled, they will say: wedid it ourselves.-Lao Tzu

Management style  “A leader is one who knows the way, goes the way, and shows the way." - John C. Maxwell I always believed that it was critical to have the correct/effective Management style. I do not believe in a Command-and-Control style which results in staff fearing their leaders and must constantly look over their shoulders for being micromanaged. I promote a style of Trust and Inspire which allows people to Innovate and use their full potential to the benefit of their companies without the fear of failure. Too many businesses suffer from poor results due to poor management styles. The CEO of Microsoft took over at an embattled Microsoft in 2014 and turned the business around from a market value of 300 BN USD to 2 trillion USD today. Poor management must be identified early in a company and be eliminated. During my career, I have found most managers were trained in the technical side of their Jobs, but not in good management pra