ctices or they exit university without required management training. The ability to uplift their subordinates is lacking and toachieve results via the people. 32

 “Ghandi was saying that human beings only use a small percentage of what they are capable of and the secret lies in extracting people’s capability via a Trust and Inspire management style.” Their staff is not being trained, hence not trusted to do a good job.It was very clear to me in my career, that when there were staffproblems to find out who was managing the people and withoutexception poor management would be the reason.33People don’t leave bad jobs... They leavebecause of bad bosses, and poor management,who don’t appreciate their value.-Marcus BuckinghamToday is your opportunity to build thetomorrow you want.-Ken PoirotThe bottom line is, bad managers are badfor business, and they’re even worse fortheir employees.-Arnold Smeets

Poor management is in most cases the key reason for businessfailure or poor performance. Any problem can be traced back tothe quality of management and the lack of a good leader. Toomany managers are just managing instead of leading people. “The challenge of leadership is to be strong, but not rude; be kind, but not weak; be bold, but not a bully; be humble, but not timid; be proud, but not arrogant; have humor but without folly.” “The art of leadership is saying no, not saying yes. It is very easy to say  yes.” “The workforce demands a new kind of leader – a leader who can see develop and unleash the greatness in every person “ When I left the company Tiger Brands, one of the senior managers came to me and thanked me for giving them wings to fly, based on my delegating style. That confirmed my success with utilizing people effectively while they develop. Another important thing to have is “Passion”. I am 73 but have lost none of my passion. Where there is passion there is a belief thatall things are possible. 34

People with the right attitude are critical, in some cases, it is betterto appoint a person with the right attitude instead of betterqualifications. The other embarrassing observation during my career was the fact that the floor staff in a factory remains employed for many years i.e. 20 years, but management changes every 2 to 3 years. Every new manager or Executive arrives with “new Ideas” that disappear over a year or two and they are gone. Shopfloor staff questioned me many times about this, and it has become a laughing matter. Only a few Executives can motivate and uplift their staff and walk a long sustainable journey with them. Many managers are also not in touch with the needs of their people, hence managing or leading people they don’t know. They also don’t invite ideas and inputs from the lower-level staff who do all the work at floor level whilst management sits in their Ivory Towers. Emotional intelligence is critical when managing or leading people. The importance of handling relationships correctly is very important. 35

 ” Being a leader is a privilege to have. Your job is about beingable to help people to achieve their best potential.” “People have greatness inside of them – so my job as a leader is to unleash their potential – not control the me” “It is a privilege, not an entitlement, to lead” “Vulnerability is not a weakness; it is our greatest measure of courage” “People will forget what you have said, people will forget what you have done, but they will never forget how you made them feel” 36Emotional intelligence is your ability torecognise and understand emotions inyourself and others, and your ability to usethis awareness to manage your behaviourand relationships.-Travis Bradberry

It is also good to identify mentors throughout your career. Thesemust be trusted by high-integrity colleagues who can give youhonest feedback on a regular basis, and vice versa. This network willstand you in good stead later in your career. In my experience, many companies don’t have clear strategies or goals for their business or departments. For example, no strategy toimprove their Supply Chain. Companies complete their annualbudgets without any strategic preparation like a “Bos Beraad“ or“think tank” to agree on the next year’s strategy. There might bestructure changes based on the new strategy, but not foreseen inthe budget.Mission and Vision statements are also absent in many businesses. The one that I find intriguing is the comment or advertisement in Companies that “People are our most important assets” However when a business gets in financial difficulty people the “most important “ assets are being dismissed first.? Nobody in the management is investigating how to grow the business instead of closing it down. Remember structure follows strategy.  Many companies do notchange their structure after changing their strategy, thenimplementation becomes a problem37

There will also be times in your career when you will have to takerisks i.e. making critical decision/s. You will gain experience fromthe outcome right or wrong. “We take risks knowing that risks will sometimes result in failure, but without the possibility of failure, there is no possibility of success. “ Remember the book called “Failing Forward” The most successful people in the world failed many times, but they learned from it. It is not a shame to fail. It is also important to embrace new technologies as the world is changing so rapidly today, i.e. AI technology. Finally, the importance of good communication is critical. It is so important that the company strategy and goals are clear to the total workforce. 38

39Effective communication in theworkplace isn’t just about speakingclearly, it’s about ensuring yourmessage is heard and understood.-Sheryl SandbergIn every thriving workplace,communication is the thread that weavessuccess.-Anna Richards

 As you take on more responsibility in your career, you will have bigger teams reporting to you, hence the importance of having the right people under you. People that you can delegate to, and trust all your goals will be achieved. This is where the Trust and Inspirestyle is so important. All levels of staff should be empowered all thetime. It is also very important to celebrate success down to the shop floor. In many companies, the Management team might celebrate, but the shopfloor never benefits i.e. the people who do a lot of work. I had a banner at the entrance of my company in Port Elizabethwhere I was the Managing Director which read “WORK SMART ANDHAVE FUN” and we applied it.  40The art of communication is thelanguage of leadership.-James Humes

Sporting career  Sports played a major part in my life and even at 73 today I love watching sports and going to the Gym on a regular basis. Rememberthat none of this will be possible without good health, hencekeeping a steady diet and regular training is critical. I showed greattalent at school as I played Rugby, did well in athletics participatedat a high level of Gymnastics where I earned a silver medal at atraining camp. As a result, I became a very good trampolinist. However, at a later stage in school, I got interested in Tennis via my sister and brother-in-law who played tennis. I did not realize that this would become my main sport in which I excelled and won about 20 Tiles throughout my career. I also had success at theprovincial level and won the prestigious Vaal Triangle championshipfor 4 years. During my AECI business trip to Germany, I had to coachthe total company staff for 2 Months in Dusseldorf.I had a tennis court at home and coached about 60 pupils every week. At one stage I coached all the Champions in their age groups i.e. under 12, 14, 16 and 18 years old. At that stage, I was playing 1st League tennis. My two best wins were beating the Free state no.1 player doing a provincial match and beating the 41

South African No.1 under 16 player called Pieter Aldrich who laterwon international tournaments and were in the top ten Men’sdouble players in the w