{"ok":true,"job":{"id":"74d662df-09df-4072-95b9-081f00bf29c2","jobType":"DraftChapter","status":"Claimed","priority":5,"retryCount":1,"inputJson":{"chapterId":"fc54b361-8c02-41ac-a09a-3bdf33fc8fc8","chapterNumber":1}},"project":{"id":"9a1c1078-c007-41dd-a646-5a4c717b1d2a","title":"The Apprentice\u0027s Compass","subtitle":"From Boilermaker to Manager","description":null,"genre":"Memoir, Business","fictionOrNonfiction":"Nonfiction","targetAudience":"Low End to Management","writingTone":"warm, authoritative, conversational","language":"en","targetWordCount":90000,"targetReadingLevel":"general adult"},"request":null,"existingChapters":[{"id":"fc54b361-8c02-41ac-a09a-3bdf33fc8fc8","chapterNumber":1,"title":"Sparks in the Dust","summary":"Open on the shop floor: the noise, the heat, the smell of cutting oil, and a young apprentice with no real plan beyond the next shift. Establish where the story starts and the world the reader is being invited into.","wordCount":0,"status":"Planned","contentMarkdown":null},{"id":"6c6b204b-e784-4c29-9b62-6c0df64ec3ea","chapterNumber":2,"title":"Tools in Hand","summary":"The early apprentice years, learning to be a boilermaker the proper way under hard-edged but fair tradesmen. Show how craft discipline, attention to detail, and respect for the work quietly install the habits that will later make a manager.","wordCount":0,"status":"Planned","contentMarkdown":null},{"id":"4eab9b58-66fb-4c9a-b910-cd38f4b1929f","chapterNumber":3,"title":"The First Hard Lesson","summary":"A defining mistake, accident, or setback early in the trade that could have ended the journey. Reflect on how owning failure honestly is the first real act of leadership, long before any title arrives.","wordCount":0,"status":"Planned","contentMarkdown":null},{"id":"c22c2246-c380-4877-8678-2e6f75c89221","chapterNumber":4,"title":"Men Who Took a Chance","summary":"Portraits of the first mentors: foremen, charge-hands, older tradesmen who saw something and invested. Examine what mentorship actually looks like in a working-class environment, and what the apprentice owed them in return.","wordCount":5953,"status":"Drafted","contentMarkdown":"# Men Who Took a Chance\n\nThere is a kind of debt that does not appear on any ledger, and it is the only kind I have ever found genuinely difficult to repay.\n\nIt is the debt you owe to the people who looked at you, early on, when you were not yet much to look at, and decided, for reasons that were never fully explained to you at the time, that you were worth the bother. They could have ignored you. Most people did. They could have given you the easy answer, the polite nod, the *ja, well, you will get there in your own time, my boy* that is the workshop equivalent of being patted on the head and sent away. Many of the older men I worked alongside in those first years did exactly that, and there was nothing wrong with them for it. They had their own work to do, their own crews to look after, their own tired bodies to get home in one piece at the end of a shift.\n\nBut a small handful of them did something different. They stopped what they were doing. They turned around. They looked at the apprentice in front of them properly, the way you might look at a workpiece you were not sure about, and they made a small, deliberate decision to invest a piece of their time and their reputation in him. They had nothing obvious to gain by it. They were not paid for it. Nobody in management would ever know they had done it. They did it anyway.\n\nThis chapter is about those men. What they did. Why I think they did it. And what, slowly, over years, I came to understand I owed them in return.\n\n## The shape of mentorship on the floor\n\nI want to start by saying what mentorship was not, in the world I came up in, because the word has been hollowed out lately by the kind of corporate language that turns everything into a programme.\n\nIt was not a scheme. Nobody had been **assigned** to me. There were no quarterly check-ins. There was no document somewhere with my **development plan** on it, signed by both parties and filed for review. If you had walked up to one of the men I am about to describe and called him my *mentor*, he would have looked at you as if you had asked him whether he was my therapist. The word would have embarrassed him. The thing itself would not have. The thing itself was just something he did, in the gaps between the work, because that was what older tradesmen did for the apprentices who looked like they were going to stick.\n\nMentorship on a working-class shop floor, in my experience, looked like four or five small things repeated over years.\n\nIt looked like a hand on your shoulder, briefly, before you were about to do something stupid. *Not that way, my boy. Come here a minute.* You would come over. He would not lecture you. He would show you the right way, once, in about ninety seconds, and then he would walk off and let you try it yourself. He would not stand over you. He would not check that you had got it. He had trusted you to absorb the correction and he had moved on. The dignity of that small choreography is something I have never quite seen reproduced in any classroom.\n\nIt looked like being given the next harder job a little before you were ready for it. You would be on a routine task, sweating through it, and the foreman would walk past, glance at your work, and say, almost to no one in particular, *when you are done with that, come and have a look at this one with me*. The job he had in mind was, you discovered later, slightly above your level. He had decided you could handle it. He had not asked you. He had not made a fuss. He had just opened a door that he was perfectly capable of leaving closed, and he had walked through it ahead of you to make sure you followed.\n\nIt looked like being told the truth about your work in a way nobody else was going to bother to tell you. *That weld is rubbish. Grind it out and do it again. Stop holding the rod like you are afraid of it.* The sentences were short. They did not soften anything. But they also did not contain any contempt. They contained, instead, an assumption that you were capable of hearing them and getting better, which is the highest compliment one tradesman can pay another. Contempt comes when somebody has decided you cannot improve. Honesty comes when they have decided you can.\n\nIt looked like being defended, very quietly, when somebody more senior was being unreasonable about you. You would not always know it had happened. You would find out, years later, in an offhand remark at a funeral or a retirement party. *Did you know old So-and-So told the engineer to leave you alone that time, said you were doing fine and the engineer was the problem?* You would not have known. The old man had not told you. He had not wanted the credit. He had simply put his own standing on the line, for you, in a room you were not in, and gone home and said nothing about it.\n\nAnd it looked like being, somehow, just there. In the canteen. At the locker. Outside in the smoke break you did not yet smoke. You would find yourself standing next to him without any obvious reason, and a small conversation would happen, and a small piece of information would pass from him to you, and the conversation would end as casually as it had begun. Over a year, those small conversations added up to an education that no one could have planned in advance because none of its participants were quite aware that it was happening.\n\nThat was mentorship. Not a programme. A texture.\n\n## The first portrait — Oom Hennie\n\nI am going to give you portraits of three of the men, because abstractions about mentorship are not worth much without faces.\n\nThe first I want to tell you about, I will call Oom Hennie. That was not quite his name. His name was longer and the version everyone used in the shop was shorter, but Hennie is close enough and respectful enough for what I want to do here. He had been a boilermaker for, I think, somewhere north of thirty-five years by the time I met him. His hands looked like they had been carved out of something harder than the rest of him. He was not tall. He was not loud. He had a way of looking at a piece of work that made younger men go quiet without him having said a word.\n\nI had been at the firm for about three months when he first spoke to me directly. I had been struggling with a layout on a small pressure vessel head — the kind of geometry that looks straightforward on the drawing and turns into a small private nightmare on the steel — and I had been redoing my marks for what was probably the fourth time when his shadow fell across my workpiece.\n\nHe did not say hello. He did not introduce himself. He had been three bays away and I had not known he was watching.\n\nHe said, *Show me what you did.*\n\nI showed him. I expected to be torn into. I had seen him tear into other apprentices, in a flat unsmiling way that did not raise his voice and did not need to.\n\nHe looked at the steel. He looked at the drawing. He looked at me. He said, *Your method is wrong. Your maths is right. Come stand here.* And he showed me, in about three minutes, a way of laying out that piece that I have used, with very small variations, for the rest of my career. He used a piece of chalk. He drew three lines. He made one small remark about why the way I had been taught it in the trade test was theoretically correct but practically slow, and he did not say a word against the instructors who had taught me. He simply offered a better way and let me decide what to do with it.\n\nThen he walked back to his bay and did not speak to me again that day, or the next.\n\nIt was about a fortnight later that I worked out what he had done. He had not just shown me a technique. He had given me permission to think about the work, rather than simply execute the work. He had quietly let me in on something that the trade does not tell young men loudly enough: that the methods you are taught are starting points, not commandments, and that part of becoming a real tradesman is learning when to vary from them and when not to. He had trusted me with that distinction before I had any right to it.\n\nI started watching him after that. Not in a stalking way. In the way young men watch older men they have begun, despite themselves, to want to learn from. I watched how he held himself in meetings with engineers. I watched how he spoke to younger apprentices, including ones less promising than I was. I watched how he behaved when a job went wrong, which was almost the most instructive of all. He did not look for someone to blame. He looked for what had failed in the process, and then he fixed the process, and then, separately and privately, if a person needed to be spoken to, he spoke to them out of earshot. The thing he never did was create a public spectacle around a mistake. I have seen many managers since, with degrees and titles he did not have, fail that basic test of decency, and I have never once seen Oom Hennie fail it.\n\nYears later, when I was running my own crews, I had occasion to make a hard call on a job that was over budget and over time, and I caught myself, in the meeting, about to do exactly the wrong thing — about to assign blame in the room. I stopped. I do not know why I stopped. I think a small, dry voice somewhere in the back of my head said something like *not in front of them, my boy*. I closed the conversation, moved the meeting on, and spoke to the person privately at the end of the day, the way he would have.\n\nThat is what mentorship does to you. It plants a voice in you that you will hear for the rest of your working life, often when you least expect it, almost always at exactly the moment you were about to do something you would have regretted.\n\n## The second portrait — the foreman who put me on the lift\n\nThe second man I want to tell you about was a foreman. I am going to leave him nameless, because the story is not flattering to the people he worked for at the time, and he had children who still live in the town.\n\nHe was younger than Oom Hennie. Maybe fifteen years older than me. He had come up through the trade in a different shop and had been brought in to run the day shift after some kind of dispute with the previous foreman that nobody on the floor was ever told the details of. He was an outsider, in other words, in a workshop that did not warm to outsiders quickly.\n\nHe warmed to me before he had any reason to.\n\nI had been there for about a year and a half. I was no longer the rawest of the apprentices, but I was not yet trusted with anything that mattered. The work I was being given was repetitive, safe, low-risk. I was beginning to feel the dullness that creeps into apprentices at that stage of the journey, when the novelty of the trade has worn off and the satisfaction of mastery has not yet arrived. It is a dangerous middle. A lot of good young men leave the trade in that middle, because nobody has thought to challenge them and they do not yet have the language to ask for a challenge themselves.\n\nHe noticed.\n\nI do not know how he noticed. He cannot have been watching me closely. He had a whole shift to run, with its own crises and its own characters, and I was one apprentice among several. But one morning, a job came in that needed a small crew sent up onto a high lift to do some patch work on a structure that was not, strictly, my level. It was a senior tradesman\u0027s job, with a competent assistant. He picked me as the assistant.\n\nThe senior tradesman he had picked to work with was, I should tell you, not an easy man. He had a temper and a tongue and a very low tolerance for apprentices who slowed him down. Pairing me with him on the lift was, in one reading, a deliberate cruelty. In another, it was the foreman\u0027s quiet way of testing whether I could hold my own in a hard situation with a hard man, in a place where the consequences of a mistake would be physical rather than theoretical.\n\nI was terrified. I was also, almost immediately, alert in a way I had not been for months. The dullness of the middle vanished within five minutes of stepping onto that platform. The senior man barked at me twice in the first hour, both times deservedly. He stopped barking by the end of the day. He even said, as we came down, *not bad, china. Tomorrow we do the south side.*\n\nWe did not become friends. He went back to being his ordinary difficult self on the next job. But the foreman who had put us together had moved something in my standing in the shop that did not move back. I had been seen, by a man whose opinion the rest of the floor respected, working at a level above the one I had been kept at. The next job I was assigned to was harder than the previous one. The one after that, harder still. None of this was announced. None of it was framed as a promotion or a development pathway. It was simply that the doors began to open, one after another, in a sequence the foreman had quietly designed, and I walked through them.\n\nAbout six months later, in a corridor, I tried to thank him for it. I was clumsy about it. I was a young man and I did not have the vocabulary for what I was trying to say, and the words came out as something close to *thanks for, you know, the lift job and the others*.\n\nHe looked at me as if I was being slightly ridiculous, which I was. He said, *I did not do you a favour. I put you somewhere I thought you could be useful. If you had not been useful, I would have moved you. Do not make it more than it was.*\n\nAnd then, because he could see I was still standing there, he said, more quietly, *but it is the right kind of question to ask. Just ask it less often. Get on with the next thing.*\n\nI have thought about those two sentences a lot. *Do not make it more than it was.* He was protecting both of us, I think now, from a kind of sentimentality that would have made the thing harder to repeat. If the next apprentice he gave a chance to had to come and thank him every time, he would have stopped doing it. The pact, unspoken, was that you took the chance, you used it, and you went and gave somebody else a chance later when you were in a position to do so. That was the price. That was the only price. You did not have to feel grateful in any way you would have to perform. You just had to keep the chain going.\n\nI have tried, in the years since, to keep it going. I will tell you, before this chapter ends, about a young man I think I may have done it for. I cannot be sure. The point of doing it is that you do not get to be sure.\n\n## The third portrait — the charge-hand who did not give up on me\n\nThe third man I want to tell you about is, in some ways, the most important, because he gave me the kind of chance that the others did not have to give — the chance to stay in the trade at all.\n\nI had reached a point, somewhere in my second-to-last apprentice year, when I had begun to wonder whether I was going to make it through. I will be honest: I was not the most natural tradesman of my intake. I had hands that learned, but they learned a little slower than the best of the apprentices around me. I had a head for the maths, which helped, but heads do not weld plate. There was a stretch of about four months when I produced a run of work that was, frankly, mediocre, and I could feel the older men beginning to make the small, careful adjustments they made around an apprentice who they had quietly decided was not going to come right.\n\nThe charge-hand on my section at the time was a man I will call Sipho, although that was not his name either. He was a generation older than me, had come into the trade by a much harder road than mine, and had a reputation for being a slightly stern, slightly distant figure who got the work done and did not say very much that was not strictly necessary.\n\nHe did something, in those four months, that I have spent decades trying to understand.\n\nHe did not encourage me. He did not pull me aside and tell me I had it in me and that I should just keep going. He did not give me speeches. What he did, instead, was put me on every difficult job he could find, with the kind of expectation that I would manage them, and let me struggle in front of him without rescuing me.\n\nIt was the opposite of giving up on me. From the outside it might have looked harsh, and on bad days it felt harsh from the inside too. But what he was communicating, by his behaviour rather than his words, was this: *I do not believe you are bad. I believe you are stuck. I am going to keep treating you like a man who is going to come right, because that is the only treatment that gives a stuck man a chance of coming right. If I start treating you like a man who is not going to make it, you will not make it. So I am not going to do that, even when the evidence is against you.*\n\nI have never had this confirmed by him. He died, some years ago, before I ever had the wits or the courage to sit down with him and ask. But I am almost certain that this was what he was doing, because I have since done it, deliberately, with one or two of my own people who hit the same kind of trough, and it works for the same reason. A struggling person who is treated as a struggling person becomes a failing person. A struggling person who is treated as a competent person who is having a hard month often, not always but often, finds their feet again.\n\nIn my case I found them. The fourth month passed. The work began, slowly, to come back. By the time I qualified, I was once more solidly in the middle of my intake, and Sipho was solidly in the upper end of the older men whose opinion of my work I most cared about. He never said a word to me about the bad stretch. He never alluded to it. He treated it, after the fact, as if it had not happened, and that too I have come to understand is part of the gift. He had decided that the bad months were not who I was, and he was not going to be the one to make them part of my permanent record.\n\nI owe him, in many ways, the existence of the rest of this book.\n\n## What I came to understand they had in common\n\nAfter many years, when I had spent enough time on the other side of the relationship to begin to see the structure of it, I started to notice a pattern in the men who had taken a chance on me.\n\nThey were not, on the whole, the most famous tradesmen in the shop. The famous ones, the ones with the reputations, were usually too busy being famous to spend time on apprentices. The ones who actually did the work of bringing young men along were, almost without exception, of a slightly quieter sort. They were respected, but they were not lionised. They produced excellent work, but they did not draw attention to it. They were sometimes, in fact, slightly underused by the official structure of the shop, which had a way of not noticing the people who did the steady, useful, non-spectacular things.\n\nThey had each, I think, been mentored themselves in roughly the same way. None of them said this out loud, but the patterns of their behaviour bore the marks of someone older having done the same things for them. Oom Hennie\u0027s quick, dignified correction was not a personal invention. It was something he had received, and was passing on. The foreman\u0027s quiet placement of an apprentice on a harder job than he was strictly ready for was something he had clearly seen done. Sipho\u0027s stubborn refusal to give up on a stuck young man almost certainly came from somewhere in his own history, in a place none of us were ever told about. The chain went back further than any of them, and forward further than any of us would live to see.\n\nThey did not, ever, expect to be thanked properly. The clumsy attempt I had made in the corridor with the foreman was probably the high-water mark of how any of them was ever thanked by me when they were alive. They would have been embarrassed by anything more, and they would have suspected anything less. The transaction they were running was not really with me. It was with the trade itself, and possibly with the older men who had done the same for them. I was a beneficiary of the transaction, but I was not exactly a party to it.\n\nAnd they were, almost without exception, harder on themselves than on the people they were bringing along. This is the part I would most like to underline for any reader who is sitting in the position they were in and wondering whether they are getting it right. The men I most respected as mentors did not have a high opinion of their own skill at it. They thought, mostly, that they were just getting on with the work. They would have been astonished to be told that they were the difference between an apprentice making it and not making it. They did not see themselves that way at all. They were, in their own minds, simply the next man up the line, doing what the man up the line from them had done for him. That modesty, I think now, is one of the reasons the thing worked. The moment somebody starts to think of themselves as a great mentor, they almost always become a worse one. The role does not respond well to self-consciousness. It responds to the kind of attention that is mostly directed at the work, and at the person, and almost not at all at the relationship.\n\n## What the apprentice owes back\n\nI have been writing as if the only direction of obligation runs from the apprentice towards the older man. That is not how I now think of it. There is a debt that runs the other way too, and it is easier to overlook because no one ever bills you for it.\n\nThe apprentice owes the man who took a chance on him three things, none of which the older man will ever ask for.\n\nHe owes him, first, the seriousness of effort. The greatest insult you can pay to somebody who has invested their time in you is to be casual about it. If a senior tradesman has spent twenty minutes showing you something he did not need to show you, and you go away and treat the lesson as one among many, equal in weight to the time you spent loitering at the coffee urn, you have wasted both your time and his. You owe him at least the dignity of taking the gift as a gift. That means trying the technique. Trying it more than once. Coming back, if it does not work, and saying *I tried this, this and this, and it is not landing — what am I missing?* That sentence is the apprentice\u0027s primary obligation in the relationship. It is not gratitude. It is engagement.\n\nHe owes him, second, the discipline of not leaning. There is a temptation, when someone takes you under their wing, to want them to do it more and more often. To make yourself dependent. To go and find them every time you have a small problem you could have worked out by yourself. This is, I have come to believe, a serious failure of the apprentice\u0027s side of the bargain. The whole point of the mentorship is to make you into a man who can stand on his own. If you use it to make yourself into a man who cannot stand without his mentor, you have not understood the gift, and you have made yourself into a heavier and heavier burden on a man who has plenty of other work to do. The apprentice\u0027s job, increasingly as the years go on, is to need the mentor less, not more. The good mentors I have known were quietly pleased when an apprentice stopped coming to ask them things, because that meant the work had taken. They were never offended by it.\n\nAnd he owes him, third, the obligation to pass it forward. This is the part that is non-negotiable, and the part I have come to think of as the actual repayment of the original debt. The senior man did not invest in you for your benefit alone. He invested in you because that is how the trade survives across generations. If you receive the gift and do not, in turn, become the kind of older man who passes it on to somebody coming up behind you, you have broken a chain that has, in most cases, been running for longer than you have been alive. You do not get to opt out of this. It is the only price the older man ever charged, and he did not even charge it openly, because he assumed you would understand.\n\nI have not always lived up to this third obligation. I want to be honest about that. There were years, particularly in the early management period I will describe in later chapters, when I was so busy and so unsure of my own footing that I let several young men pass under my nose without giving them the kind of attention the older men had given me. I look back on that with some shame. Not enormous shame. I was not a monster. I just did not yet realise that the work of bringing somebody along did not require an enormous block of time and a formal arrangement. It required, mostly, attention. A two-minute correction in the right place. A harder job offered at the right moment. The refusal to give up on somebody who was in a bad month.\n\nWhen I started, deliberately, to do those small things again, in the way the older men had done them for me, I felt, for the first time, that I had begun to repay the debt properly. Not by saying thank you to Oom Hennie at his funeral, although I did that too, and meant it. By behaving, in front of a younger man, the way Oom Hennie would have behaved if he had been in the room.\n\n## The one I think I may have done it for\n\nI want to end with one short story, because everything I have said so far has been about the people who did it for me, and the chapter would be incomplete without at least a glance at the other side.\n\nThere was a young man, some years after I had become a charge-hand myself, who arrived at the shop as an apprentice and was, very obviously, going to struggle. He had the right intelligence. He had the wrong confidence. He had a way of pulling back from a job at exactly the moment when he should have been leaning into it, and the older men around him had begun, within about a fortnight, to make the small adjustments around him that meant they had quietly decided he was not going to come right.\n\nI watched this happening, and I recognised it, and I thought, *I have seen this story before. From the other side.*\n\nI did not give him a speech. I did not pull him aside and tell him I believed in him. He would have been suspicious of either, and he would have been right to be suspicious. What I did, instead, was put him on harder jobs than he was strictly ready for, with the steady expectation that he would manage them, and let him struggle in front of me without rescuing him. I corrected him quickly when he was wrong. I did not draw attention to his mistakes in front of the others. I assumed, openly, that he was a competent young man who was having a hard month.\n\nHe came right. Not immediately. Not dramatically. Over the course of about a year, the slumped shoulders straightened, the work got better, the confidence began to catch up to the intelligence. By the time he qualified, he was a solid mid-pack tradesman with a future, and within a few years after that he was beginning to be noticed for the kind of steady, useful, non-spectacular work that the older men in any shop instinctively know how to value.\n\nI have never told him what I was doing. I do not intend to. I do not even know, for certain, that what I was doing was the difference. He may have come right anyway. He may have had his own Sipho I did not know about, somewhere in his life outside the shop, holding the line for him in a way I never saw.\n\nBut I think, on balance, that the chain did pass through me on its way to him. That is the best I can say, and the best I think any of us can say about this kind of work. You do not get to be sure. You only get to behave, in front of the next person, the way you wish someone had behaved in front of you, and to trust that, somewhere down the line, the same thing will be done by them for somebody else.\n\nThat is, I have come to believe, the only honest repayment of the debt I started this chapter with. You cannot pay it back to the men who gave it to you. Most of them are dead now, and the ones who are not would refuse the gesture. You can only pay it forward, in the same small unannounced way it was paid to you, and you will not get a receipt for it either.\n\n## A short list, for the apprentice still on the floor\n\nIf you are reading this as a young person, somewhere in the middle of the trade or the early years of any work that demands a craft, I want to leave you with a few things that I wish someone had said to me plainly when I was where you are.\n\n- **Notice who is watching.** Most of the men around you are not watching. A handful are. The handful matters more than the rest combined. Behave, every day, as if those people are in the room, because some days they are and you do not always know which days.\n- **Do not chase the loud men.** The tradesmen who will teach you the most are almost never the loudest ones. They are usually quieter than they should be for the quality of their work. Stand near them. Hand them tools. Ask short, useful questions. Go back to your bench and try what they told you.\n- **Take the harder job when it is offered.** It will not always be offered explicitly. Sometimes it will just be left lying around in front of you to see if you pick it up. Pick it up. If you cannot manage it, you will learn that quickly enough. If you can, you will have opened the next door without anybody having to open it for you.\n- **Do not lean on your mentors.** Need them less, not more, as the months go by. The relationship is meant to make you into someone who can stand on his own. If you find yourself going to the same man for every small thing, you have not understood the gift, and you are wasting a piece of his life.\n- **Keep the chain.** When you become the older man, do for the next apprentice what the older men did for you. Not with a programme. Not with a speech. With the small, almost invisible behaviours that move a young person forward without his quite knowing how. The trade has survived this long because that chain has held. It survives the next generation because of you.\n\nAnd remember, on the days when you cannot quite see why somebody more senior bothered with you: it was not, in the end, about you. It was about the work, and the people who would come after you, and a quiet promise that older tradesmen have been making to younger ones for longer than any of us has been alive. You are part of that promise now. The men who took a chance on you did so on the assumption that you would keep it.\n\nKeep it.\n\nThe next chapter is about the day they finally let me write *tradesman* after my name, and the small, dangerous mistake that almost all of us make in the first year of that title — the mistake of believing that the ticket in our pocket is the destination, rather than the starting line. The men in this chapter would have laughed, gently, at any of us who thought that. Most of them, by then, had been tradesmen for thirty years, and were still, in their own quiet way, apprentices to the work.\n"},{"id":"d2bd6f7a-57a0-4020-97f3-6c8ff0eb836b","chapterNumber":5,"title":"Earning the Ticket","summary":"Qualifying as a tradesman and the quiet pride of that moment. Use it to explore identity, status, and the trap of believing the qualification is the destination rather than the starting line.","wordCount":0,"status":"Planned","contentMarkdown":null},{"id":"27fe1f10-8364-4eee-ba0e-f8cc50f68d58","chapterNumber":6,"title":"Leading Without a Title","summary":"The first time others started looking to the author for direction, without any formal authority. Unpack how influence is earned through competence and reliability long before it is granted on an org chart.","wordCount":0,"status":"Planned","contentMarkdown":null},{"id":"4d45e721-9c15-4965-ad9c-ace71ed69459","chapterNumber":7,"title":"The Step Up to Supervisor","summary":"Crossing the line from doing the work to being responsible for other people\u0027s work. The awkwardness of supervising former peers, and the first real taste of how lonely the job above the toolbox can be.","wordCount":0,"status":"Planned","contentMarkdown":null},{"id":"6cf02fb6-403a-49a0-a78f-1a2f4f24917d","chapterNumber":8,"title":"Hard Years, Lean Years","summary":"Economic downturns, retrenchments, projects gone wrong, and personal cost. Show resilience as a daily practice rather than a slogan: getting up, showing up, and protecting the team when there is no easy answer.","wordCount":6356,"status":"Drafted","contentMarkdown":"# Hard Years, Lean Years\n\nThere is a particular kind of morning that you only learn about after you have lived through a few bad years. It is not the morning of the disaster. The morning of the disaster has its own awful clarity. You know what has happened. You know roughly what to do, even if you do not yet know how. Adrenaline arrives uninvited and gets you to lunchtime.\n\nThe mornings I am talking about come later. They are the ones in the middle of a long, grinding stretch when nothing is on fire and nothing is being rebuilt and the order book is thin and the bank is patient but not friendly and the people on the floor have started asking, very politely, whether the rumours are true. Those mornings do not announce themselves. They just arrive, one after the other, for months. You wake up. You drink the same cup of coffee you drank yesterday. You drive in. And somewhere on the road you realise that the job today is, again, just to keep the thing standing for one more day, and that nobody is going to congratulate you for it because most of them will not even know you did it.\n\nThat is the work this chapter is about. Not the moment of the storm. The long, dull weather afterwards, when the storm has gone but the damage has not, and the people around you need you to behave as if you still have a plan.\n\n## What a lean year actually looks like\n\nI want to start with a description, because the phrase **lean year** can mean almost anything. People throw it around in boardrooms with the same casualness that they throw around **challenging environment** or **headwinds**, and the words have become so polished that they have stopped doing any useful work.\n\nA lean year, in the kind of business I was working in, looked like this.\n\nThe phone rang less. That was the first sign, before any of the numbers caught up. You did not need a spreadsheet to feel it. The reception area was quieter. The reps were back earlier. The quotes you sent out did not turn into orders as quickly, and the ones that did came back with the price line circled and a small, polite question mark next to it.\n\nThen the existing work started to behave differently. Clients who had always paid in thirty days started paying in forty-five, then sixty. Not because they were dishonest. Because their phones had also gone quiet. The whole chain was breathing in at the same time. Cash that had moved through the business like water through a pipe started moving through it like syrup through a straw.\n\nThen, after a month or two of that, the conversations changed. Suppliers phoned to **check in**, which in that industry meant *we have noticed you are stretching us and we are politely asking if we should worry*. The bank manager, who had previously been a face you saw at year-end, started suggesting coffee. The auditors became, very slightly, more thorough. None of it was hostile. All of it was a small tightening.\n\nAnd then, finally, you started looking at the wage bill on a Friday and doing arithmetic that no human being should have to do in their head about other human beings\u0027 lives.\n\nThat is a lean year. Not one bad day. A slow, steady compression of the room you have to move in, until the decisions in front of you stop being about growth or strategy and start being about survival, dignity, and time.\n\n## The temptation to perform\n\nThe first thing that happens to a manager in a lean year, if they are not careful, is that they start to perform optimism.\n\nI do not mean lying. Most of the people I respected did not lie about the state of the business when it was bad. But there is a softer, more dangerous thing than lying, which is the habit of putting a small, professional smile on every conversation about it. *We are tight, but we are managing.* *It is a difficult quarter, but we have plans.* *We are leaner now and that is a good thing.* All of those sentences can be true. All of them can also be a costume.\n\nThe reason performing optimism is dangerous is not because your team will see through it. They will, but that is not the worst of it. The worst of it is that you start to believe it yourself. You repeat the line about being **leaner and stronger** so many times in so many meetings that, somewhere around the eighth or ninth repetition, the part of you that was honestly worried goes quiet, and you stop hearing the small, useful alarms that were telling you the truth.\n\nA leader who cannot hear their own alarms in a lean year is a leader who is going to make a confident, well-presented decision in about six weeks that they would have refused outright in a good year. I have made some of those decisions. I have watched other people make them. They almost always come dressed up as **bold moves**, and they almost always cost more than they save.\n\nSo the first habit of a lean year, before any of the practical ones, is to keep your own hearing intact. You can be calm in public. You should be. The room takes its temperature from you, and a panicked principal makes a panicked team. But in private, with the door closed and the notebook open, you have to let yourself say the thing out loud. *This is bad. I am worried about this. I do not yet know what to do about that.* If you cannot say those sentences to yourself, you cannot think clearly about them, and you will end up managing the appearance of the problem rather than the problem.\n\n## The arithmetic nobody trains you for\n\nThere is a specific kind of arithmetic that a manager has to do in a lean year, and almost nobody is trained for it.\n\nIt is the arithmetic of people.\n\nIn a good year, the numbers and the people are aligned. A new order comes in, you put a person on it, the order pays the person, the person produces work that wins the next order. The line goes one way. The arithmetic is mostly addition.\n\nIn a lean year, the line stops. You have, on one side of the page, a wage bill that does not shrink on its own. On the other side, a revenue line that has. Between the two there is a gap, and the gap is measured in months of cash. You count the months. You count them again. You count them at three in the morning when you should be asleep. And you start to realise that, at some point, the arithmetic will require subtraction. Of people.\n\nI want to say something carefully here, because I think the way most business books talk about this is dishonest.\n\nA retrenchment is not a strategic decision. It is a failure with a paper trail.\n\nI do not mean that every retrenchment is the fault of the person making it. Sometimes markets collapse. Sometimes a single client folds and takes a third of your revenue with them on a Tuesday afternoon. Sometimes a government changes the rules of the game and a sector that fed thousands of families becomes uneconomic in a quarter. You can be a faultless manager and still have to look at that page and do that subtraction. The world is not always fair to people who have done everything right.\n\nBut the act itself, of telling a human being that the work they came to on Monday will not be there on Friday, is a failure in the system somewhere. Maybe not in you. Maybe in the market, or the economy, or the chain of decisions that got the business to this point. But it is a failure. And calling it a **strategic restructure** does not change what it is. It only protects the language used by the people who do not have to do it themselves.\n\nThe reason I want to insist on the word is that it changes how you behave in the meeting. If you walk into a retrenchment meeting believing you are making a strategic decision, you will treat the person across the desk as a line item. If you walk in knowing that you are managing a failure, you will treat them as a person who is being asked to absorb some of the cost of something that was not, in any meaningful sense, their fault. Those are two different meetings. Only one of them lets the person walk out with their dignity intact.\n\n## The first time I had to let people go\n\nI am not going to tell you a sanitised version of this.\n\nThe first time I had to oversee a real reduction in headcount, I was younger than I should have been for the job, and I had not slept properly for about three weeks. The numbers had been getting worse for two quarters. We had tried the obvious things first, the way you are supposed to: we cut overtime, we paused recruitment, we renegotiated with suppliers, we sent the directors back to clients with sharpened pencils to win work at thinner margins than anyone wanted. None of it had been enough. The gap had not closed. The bank had been patient and had stopped being patient. The decision was no longer whether. It was how many, and who, and how soon.\n\nI remember sitting at my desk with the list in front of me. It was not a long list, by the standards of these things. It was long enough.\n\nI had known most of the names for years. Some of them I had hired myself. Two of them had been at my wedding. One had taken me aside, when I was an apprentice, and shown me a small trick with a torch that had probably saved my hands. They were not, on that piece of paper, abstractions. They were the people my working life had been built around.\n\nI did three things, in those days, that I still think were right. I want to put them down here, because I have seen too many managers go into that meeting with no idea what they were doing, and the cost of getting it wrong does not fall on them.\n\nThe first thing I did was refuse to delegate the conversations.\n\nThere is a tradition, in some companies, of having HR do the actual telling. The line manager sits in the room as moral support. The script comes from a folder. The handshake at the end is from a stranger. I understand why companies do this. It is more efficient, and it protects the line manager from a conversation they do not want to have. It is also, in my view, a small act of cowardice that the people on the other side of the desk feel for the rest of their lives. They do not forget who told them. They do not forget who could not look at them while it was being said.\n\nSo I told them myself. Each one. In a room I had booked for the purpose. With water on the table, and time on the clock, and nothing scheduled after the meeting so that whoever needed to sit there for an hour afterwards could sit there.\n\nThe second thing I did was tell them the truth about why.\n\nNot the press-release version. The actual version. *The order book has dropped by this much. The cost base is this. The gap is here. We have done these things to try to close it and they have not been enough. Your role is one of the ones that goes, and the reasons it is yours and not someone else\u0027s are these, and I am willing to walk you through the reasoning if you want me to.* Some of them did want me to. Most did not. But the offer was there, because the offer is what tells a person that they are still being treated as an adult.\n\nA retrenched person who understands why is angry but oriented. A retrenched person who is fobbed off with corporate language is angry and adrift, and they go home with a story that will sour for years. The cost of telling the truth, in that meeting, is about forty minutes of your time and a great deal of discomfort. The cost of not telling it is paid by the other person, for much longer than that.\n\nThe third thing I did was stay available for a while afterwards.\n\nNot for everyone. Some of them did not want to see me again, and that was their right. But for the ones who did, I made it clear that the reference call was real, the introductions were real, the cup of coffee in three months was real. Not as charity. As an acknowledgement that we had worked together, that the work had been good, and that the ending of the employment was not the ending of the respect.\n\nI will not pretend this fixed anything. It did not. People still lost incomes they needed. Families still had hard months. Marriages were strained. One man, whose face I still see sometimes, took it harder than I knew at the time and disappeared from the trade for a year. I think about him.\n\nBut within what was possible, those three habits — own the conversation, tell the truth, stay available — meant that the people who left did so with their dignity, and the people who stayed did not have to watch us treat their friends like packages being mailed out. That second part matters more than people realise. A lean year does not only damage the people who go. It damages the people who remain, sometimes more. They watch how you behaved, and they decide on the basis of that behaviour how much of themselves they are willing to give you in the next year.\n\n## Protecting the team when there is no easy answer\n\nThere is a phrase I want to put in front of you, because I have come to believe in it more strongly the older I get.\n\n**A leader\u0027s job in a lean year is to absorb anxiety, not transmit it.**\n\nThat does not mean hiding the truth. We have just been through why that is wrong. It means holding the worry in your own body long enough to convert it into a clear, specific instruction for the people around you, so that they have something to do with their hands rather than something to do with their nerves.\n\nA worried welder does worse welding. A worried foreman gives worse instructions. A worried admin clerk misses things on invoices. None of this helps the lean year. The anxiety, if you let it run free through the company, becomes its own multiplier on the original problem. Bad work is more expensive than good work. Mistakes cost money you do not have. Resignations from your best people come at precisely the moment you can least afford to replace them.\n\nSo the leader stands in the middle and does a particular kind of internal labour. You take in the bad numbers, the worried suppliers, the difficult bank conversation, the difficult board conversation. You let yourself feel it, privately, because pretending not to is its own kind of damage. And then you walk out onto the floor and you give people clear, narrow, doable work for that day.\n\n*This week, we are focusing on these three jobs. By Friday, I need these two things from your team. I will be back through tomorrow afternoon. If anything is in your way, tell me before lunch.*\n\nNotice what that does. It does not deny the situation. The team knows there is a situation. They are adults. They read the same newspapers and they look at the same car park and they hear the same rumours. What it does is give them a frame inside the situation. *Today, this is what I need from you. Tomorrow, this. The bigger thing is being handled by people whose job it is to handle it. Your job is the part of it that is in your hands.*\n\nPeople can carry a great deal of worry when they have something definite to do. They cannot carry very much of it at all when they are standing around waiting to find out what is going to happen to them. The leader\u0027s job is to keep converting the worry into work, every day, for as long as the lean year lasts.\n\n## Resilience as a daily practice\n\nThe word **resilience** gets used so often now that I have started to flinch at it. It has been printed on posters. It has been turned into a leadership cliché. There is, somewhere out there, a workshop you can attend in a conference room with sandwiches at lunch in which someone with a slide deck will teach you, in four hours, how to be resilient.\n\nThe trouble with all of this is that resilience is not a quality. It is not a thing you have or do not have, the way you have brown eyes or you do not. It is a habit, and like all habits, it is built one ordinary day at a time and lost the same way.\n\nThe resilient managers I knew in lean years were not unusually tough people. Some of them were quite gentle. They were not fearless. Most of them were quietly afraid, the way any sensible person is afraid when the numbers are bad. What they had was a small set of daily practices that they refused to let the lean year take away from them.\n\nThey got up at the same time. Even on the bad mornings. Especially on the bad mornings. The body has its own opinion about how long this is going to last, and if you let your routine collapse, the body starts to think the crisis is permanent. Keep the routine. Even if half of it is a fiction in the first week, keep it. The fiction becomes real with use.\n\nThey ate properly. I do not mean this as a joke. A manager running on coffee and the slice of pizza somebody left in the boardroom is a manager who will, by Thursday, make a decision they would not have made if they had eaten breakfast. The body is part of the equipment.\n\nThey moved their body. Some of them walked. Some of them ran. One man I knew, much older than me at the time, swam thirty lengths of an awful municipal pool three mornings a week for the whole of a two-year downturn, and he told me, much later, that it was the only thing that kept him sane. Movement washes the chemistry out. Sitting in a chair worrying does not. Pick your form. Do it on the bad days too.\n\nThey protected the boundary between work and home. Not perfectly. Nobody does this perfectly in a real crisis. But they did not let the lean year colonise every meal, every weekend, every conversation with their children. The reason was not work-life balance as it is now sold in glossy magazines. The reason was much more practical: the person who has not had a single un-work conversation in three weeks is the person whose judgement begins to narrow. They start to see every problem as the same problem. They stop being useful exactly when you need them to be useful.\n\nThey had someone they could be honest with. Not necessarily a coach. Not necessarily a therapist, though sometimes that. A spouse, a brother, an old friend, a mentor from earlier in the career, a pastor, a person in a similar role at a different company with whom there was a quiet, mutual confidentiality. *Today was hard. I do not know what I am going to do about Thursday. I am more scared than I have been in a while.* You need to be able to say those sentences, out loud, to a face, at least once a fortnight, or the pressure backs up inside you and starts to come out as bad temper at the people who least deserve it.\n\nThey kept showing up.\n\nThat is the centre of the whole thing, in the end. Resilience is not a posture. It is the unglamorous decision, made on a particular Monday morning, that you are going to get in the car and go to work and do today\u0027s piece of the job, even though you do not feel like it and even though it is not clear it will be enough. You do that on Monday. Then you do it on Tuesday. Then you do it on Wednesday. None of those days, in isolation, looks heroic. The sum of them, over eighteen months, is the only kind of heroism that actually matters in a long downturn.\n\nIf you ever meet a manager who has come through a lean year well, you will probably notice that they are not especially loud or especially confident on the subject. They will not lecture you about it. They will, if you ask, tell you a few small, practical things about routines and breakfasts and walking around the building. They will not promise you a method. They will say something like, *You just keep going.* It will sound like a cliché. It is not a cliché. It is the actual answer, and the reason it sounds like a cliché is that everyone who has lived through it arrived at roughly the same answer, by a different road.\n\n## What a lean year does to relationships\n\nI want to spend a few paragraphs on the human cost, because most books about business skip this, and I think the skipping is part of the problem.\n\nA lean year takes a tax on every important relationship in a manager\u0027s life, and the tax is not optional. You can be wise about how you pay it. You cannot refuse to pay it.\n\nIt takes a tax on your marriage or your closest partnership. You bring home a tiredness that does not look, from the outside, like tiredness from physical work. You did not lift anything. You did not sweat. You sat in meetings and made phone calls. To the person you live with, who has had their own difficult day, it can look like you have done nothing and are nevertheless somehow used up. Explaining the kind of tired you are without making it sound like a competition is harder than it should be, and most of us do not do it well in the first lean year. We learn, slowly, that we have to. The alternative is two people quietly resenting each other for things neither of them is doing wrong.\n\nIt takes a tax on your children, if you have them. They will not understand for years what was happening in the house. They will only remember that you were quieter in that period, or shorter-tempered, or away more, or present but not really there. The best you can do is be honest at a level they can use. *Work is hard right now. It is not your fault. I am still your father. I will be back in this conversation soon.* That is not a perfect speech. It is a hundred times better than disappearing into a study for months without explanation. Children can carry truth. They cannot carry mystery.\n\nIt takes a tax on your friendships. The ones outside work, the ones that have nothing to do with the business, become harder to maintain because you have less of yourself left for them. Some of them will quietly drift. A few of the better ones will hold on through it, often by being unreasonably patient with you. Notice who those people are. When the lean year ends, go and find them, and tell them, plainly, that you noticed. You will need them again, in a different shape, in the next one.\n\nAnd it takes a tax on the relationships with the people you lead, in a way that is not always obvious until later. You will, in a lean year, have to disappoint people who trust you. You will have to say no to pay rises that were deserved. You will have to delay equipment that the floor needed. You will have to ask people for more output than is fair from a workforce that has just absorbed a round of departures. Each of those is a small withdrawal from an account of goodwill that was built up over years. The account can take it, but only if it sees those withdrawals as withdrawals — that is, as costs that you, the leader, are aware of and intend to pay back when you can.\n\nThe managers who get this wrong are the ones who treat the lean-year compromises as the new normal. They forget that the team did them a favour by absorbing the bad year. They do not remember to thank them in a real way when things turn. Two or three years later, when the order book is full again, they wonder why the culture feels brittle and why their best people are quietly entertaining other offers. The lean year did not damage the culture. The lean year is something cultures can survive. What damaged it was the absence of repair afterwards.\n\nWhen the year ends — and it will end, even if it does not feel like it from inside — you have to be deliberate about the repair. Pay back what you can. Promote the people who carried the weight. Buy the equipment you put off. Sit down with the partners and friends and children and say, *That was a hard stretch. Thank you for staying. I want to be different now that we are through.* And then actually be different. The repair is not a speech. It is six months of behaviour.\n\n## The things that only became clear later\n\nI want to be careful here, because hindsight is a flattering mirror and I do not want to use it to make the past easier than it was.\n\nBut some things did become clear to me, in those years, that I do not think I could have learned any other way.\n\nThe first was that the business was never as fragile as it felt at three in the morning, and never as safe as it felt at two in the afternoon. The night-time fears were exaggerated. So were the daytime confidences. The truth was almost always somewhere in between, and finding it required talking to a small number of trusted people on the same day, not on different days, and triangulating between their views. The mistake of the lean year, for me, was usually to make a decision on the basis of a single conversation that had happened to land at a moment when I was either too low or too high. I learned, the slow way, to wait until I had three views from three different angles before I acted on anything that mattered.\n\nThe second was that the people who panicked first were almost always the people with the least real information. The shop floor knew the business was tight. They did not know the cash position to the day. They did not know what the bank had said in the last meeting. They did not know what the order book looked like in eight weeks\u0027 time. In the absence of that information, they filled the gap with their own fears, which were usually worse than the reality. The cure for this was not to give them the full cash position — that would have been irresponsible and, in some cases, illegal — but to give them more information than they had a strict right to. *We are tight, here is the shape of it, here is what we are doing, here is what I will tell you next month.* A small, regular, honest update did more for morale than any motivational speech, and it cost nothing except discipline.\n\nThe third was that the lean year revealed who was who. I do not mean this in a hard way. I mean that, under sustained pressure, people\u0027s actual character came forward, often quite differently from the version they had presented in the good years. Some of the loudest performers in good times went quiet, or worse. Some of the quietest grinders turned out to have a kind of stoic, dependable steel that I had not seen until the pressure was on them. I made hiring and promotion mistakes in the good years that the lean year corrected for me, sometimes painfully. After it ended, I trusted a slightly different set of people than I had trusted before, and on balance the new set was better. That was an expensive education, and I would not have chosen it. But I cannot say it was wasted.\n\nThe fourth, and the one I want to underline, was that there is a particular kind of competence that only develops in lean years and cannot be acquired any other way. A manager who has only ever managed in good times is, in a real sense, an apprentice manager. They have never had to make the hard subtraction. They have never had to look someone in the eye and tell them what they did not want to hear. They have never had to walk a quiet shop floor on a slow Tuesday morning, knowing that the next order had to come in by Friday or there would be consequences, and find a way to be honest with the people there without crushing them. Until you have done that, you have not yet been tested in the part of the job that the badge is really for. You may be very good at the rest of it. But the rest of it is not the whole of it, and the part that is missing is the part that matters most.\n\nI would not wish a lean year on anyone. I have lived through enough of them now to know that they cost more than the spreadsheets show, and that the cost is paid in parts of yourself you cannot see on a balance sheet. But I would also not, in honesty, want to take back the ones I have lived. They taught me the job in a way the good years never could have. They installed a small, useful weight in the middle of how I make decisions, which keeps me from being too cheerful when the numbers turn up again and from being too despairing when they turn down. That weight is, I think, one of the things people are paying for when they hire someone who has been through it.\n\n## What I would tell the younger me\n\nIf I could go back to the version of myself sitting at that desk with the list in front of him, the first lean year I really had to manage, I would not try to make it easier for him. I do not think you can. The hardness of those years is part of how they form you, and softening them, even in retrospect, would be a kind of cheating.\n\nBut I would put a few quiet sentences in his ear, before he walked into the first conversation.\n\nI would say: *This is not a strategic problem. It is a human one. Treat it that way and you will get fewer of the technical bits wrong, not more.*\n\nI would say: *The people you are about to disappoint are not your enemies. They will not enjoy what you say, but most of them will respect you for saying it cleanly. The ones who do not, you cannot help, and you cannot let them set the standard for the others.*\n\nI would say: *Keep your routine. Walk the floor. Eat your meals. Phone your wife. Do not become a man who only exists in the office. The office cannot hold a whole person, and a half-person is not enough for what this job is about to ask of you.*\n\nI would say: *You will not get every decision right. You will make at least one call this year that you will think about, badly, for years. That does not mean you were the wrong person for the seat. It means the seat was hard and you are human. Forgive yourself in advance, so that the guilt does not stop you making the next decision when you need to.*\n\nAnd I would say: *This will end. Not soon. Not on the schedule you would prefer. But it will end. The work, today, is to be the kind of leader who is still standing, with the team still around him, when it does.*\n\n## What stayed\n\nYears later, when the markets had recovered and the order book was healthy again and the cars in the car park were newer than the ones we had been driving during the bad stretch, I noticed something about the team that I had not expected.\n\nThe people who had been with me through the lean year had a different relationship to the company than the ones who had joined afterwards. It was not better in a sentimental way. They were not more loyal in the dog-like sense that some companies want from their staff. It was more grounded than that. They knew, because they had seen it, what the business actually looked like under pressure. They had watched the leadership make hard decisions and, in most cases, make them with their dignity intact. They had been part of carrying the weight, and they knew it.\n\nThat knowledge made them harder to spook in the next downturn, when it came. It made them better at training the new people, because they had a sense of proportion the new people did not. It made them more honest with me, because we had already had the kinds of conversations that strip away the small polite distances between a manager and the people on the floor. We had been in a room together when nobody was sure what was going to happen next, and we had not, in the end, let each other down. That is not a small thing.\n\nIf you are sitting in the middle of a lean year right now, I want you to know that this is what is being built, underneath the bad numbers. It does not feel like it from inside. From inside it feels like loss, and exhaustion, and a long, narrow corridor with no obvious end. But the corridor is also where the real culture of your business is being made, by your behaviour, day after day, in front of people who are watching more closely than they let on.\n\nDo the daily things. Tell the truth as cleanly as you can. Protect the dignity of the people leaving and the morale of the people staying. Keep your routine. Keep your relationships. Walk the floor. Eat your breakfast. Call your wife. Show up tomorrow.\n\nThat is most of the job, in a lean year. The rest is just timing, and timing is one of the things that is not in your hands.\n\n## A short list, for the desk drawer\n\nIf you are the kind of reader who likes to be able to find the practical part again on a hard morning, here it is, compressed.\n\n- **Keep your own hearing.** Do not perform optimism so hard that you stop noticing your own honest worry. The worry is information.\n- **Triangulate before you decide.** Three views from three different angles, on the same day, before any decision that matters. Never act on a single conversation at three in the morning.\n- **Own the hard meetings yourself.** Do not delegate the telling. The person across the desk will remember who looked at them. So will the people who hear about it afterwards.\n- **Tell the truth at the level they can use it.** Not the press release. Not the cash position to the cent. The shape of the situation, what is being done, what they can expect next.\n- **Absorb anxiety, do not transmit it.** Convert the bigger worry into smaller, doable work for the people in front of you. Daily. Weekly. Without stopping.\n- **Keep the routine.** Body, sleep, meals, movement. Especially on the bad mornings. The routine is not vanity. It is equipment.\n- **Pay the human tax knowingly.** Notice the cost to your marriage, your children, your friendships. Plan to repair it, in real behaviour, when the year turns.\n- **Repair afterwards.** Do not let the lean-year compromises become the new normal. Pay back what you can. Promote the people who carried the weight. Buy the equipment you put off. Say thank you in a way that costs you something.\n- **Forgive yourself in advance.** You will get a call wrong this year. It does not mean you were the wrong person in the seat. It means the seat is hard.\n- **Keep showing up.** This is, in the end, the whole of it. Tomorrow morning, again. Then the morning after that.\n\nThe next chapter is not about the storm or its aftermath. It is about what I had to teach myself, in those same years and the ones that followed, when it became obvious that craft and character were not, on their own, going to be enough. The numbers in the business had a language of their own, and until I learned to speak it, I was going to keep making good decisions for the wrong reasons and bad decisions with very confident faces. That is where we go next.\n"},{"id":"ee0f46be-aca0-463b-9a06-d1f00cfd3953","chapterNumber":9,"title":"Learning the Numbers","summary":"The deliberate effort to move beyond the trade into how a business actually makes money: costing, margins, contracts, scheduling. Argue that management without numeracy is just opinion in a clean shirt.","wordCount":0,"status":"Planned","contentMarkdown":null},{"id":"e13f3c9a-46d8-4fa8-b877-b280c74901f0","chapterNumber":10,"title":"Managing Up, Managing Sideways","summary":"Navigating directors, owners, clients, and peers, not just subordinates. Practical lessons on how to disagree, how to be trusted, and how to be heard by people more senior or more political than yourself.","wordCount":0,"status":"Planned","contentMarkdown":null},{"id":"7260a02b-bc9e-478c-9114-ca7a7a7f4514","chapterNumber":11,"title":"Building a Team You Would Follow","summary":"Hiring, training, and developing people from the ground up, often from the same kind of background the author started in. The duty to give others the chance you were given, and the cost of choosing the wrong people.","wordCount":0,"status":"Planned","contentMarkdown":null},{"id":"54911728-4e71-4022-8e40-0055b0f4aac5","chapterNumber":12,"title":"The Office Door","summary":"Stepping into a true management role with an office, a budget, and answerability to a board or owner. Confront imposter syndrome head-on and explain how craftsmanship roots help when the title still feels borrowed.","wordCount":4139,"status":"Drafted","contentMarkdown":"# The Office Door\n\nThere is a particular sound an office door makes when it closes behind you for the first time as the person whose name is on it. It is not loud. It is not dramatic. It is a soft, almost apologetic click, the kind of sound a workshop man learns to distrust because nothing important on a shop floor ever happens quietly. Real work announces itself. Real work hisses, grinds, sparks, swears. A door that closes like that, on carpet, in a corridor that smells of printer toner and instant coffee, sounds like it might be lying to you.\n\nI stood on my side of that door for a long moment before I sat down. The desk had been cleaned for me. Someone had wiped it that morning, probably the same someone who would later bring me tea I had not asked for, in a cup I would feel oddly guilty about not washing myself. There was a chair that swivelled. There was a window. There was a phone with more buttons than I had ever needed in my life, and a computer waiting with a login screen that did not yet know who I was.\n\nI remember thinking, very clearly: *They have made a mistake. They will work it out by Friday.*\n\nThat thought is the subject of this chapter. Where it comes from. Why it is louder for some of us than others. And, more usefully, what to do with it on the mornings when it will not be quiet.\n\n## The borrowed title\n\nWhen the title comes, it does not feel like yours. It feels like a coat someone has handed you at a function and asked you to wear because the owner has gone outside for a smoke. You put it on. It fits, more or less. People speak to you as if it has always been yours. And the whole time, somewhere behind your ribs, there is a small, embarrassed voice waiting for the real owner to come back through the door and ask, politely, for it back.\n\nIn my case the coat was the word **manager**. Not a foreman, not a charge-hand, not a senior tradesman who happened to be looking after a crew. Manager. With an office. With a budget. With a line on an organogram that had a box above me and several boxes below, and a quiet, terrifying understanding that the boxes below were now, in some real sense, my responsibility before they were anyone else\u0027s.\n\nI had worked for managers before. I had cursed a few of them under my breath, the way every tradesman does. I had also, by then, worked for two or three I would have walked through a wall for. I knew, in theory, what the job was. I knew what it looked like done well and what it looked like done badly. None of that knowledge, it turned out, helped me very much on the first morning.\n\nBecause knowing what the job looks like from the outside and knowing what it feels like from the inside are two different qualifications, and only one of them is granted by appointment letter.\n\n## A short, honest definition of imposter syndrome\n\nThere is a phrase that gets used for this feeling now. **Imposter syndrome.** I did not have that phrase when I needed it. We did not really talk about feelings on the shop floor, and nobody in my world had a name for the suspicion that you had been promoted by accident. We just got on with it, or we drank too much, or we became hard in ways that did not serve us later. Sometimes all three.\n\nThe phrase, when I finally heard it, was a relief. Not because it solved anything, but because it named the thing. A named thing can be discussed. An unnamed thing just sits on your chest in the early hours and tells you you are a fraud.\n\nSo let me give it a working definition, the way I have come to understand it, in plain language and without any psychology degree:\n\n\u003e Imposter syndrome is the gap between how competent you feel on the inside and how competent other people are treating you on the outside, when you secretly believe their version is wrong.\n\nThat is all it is. It is not a character flaw. It is not weakness. It is a measurement error, in the most literal sense — you are using a yardstick on yourself that you do not use on anyone else.\n\nNotice what the definition does not say. It does not say you are not competent. It does not say the people who promoted you are fools. It does not say you will be found out. It only says that you, the person who has the most data about your own shortcomings, are weighting that data far more heavily than anyone else is. Of course you are. You were there for all of it. You remember every weld that had to be ground out, every quote that came back wrong, every conversation you wish you had handled better. They remember the bridge that is still standing and the team that did not walk.\n\nBoth sets of memories are real. Only one of them is being used to make the decision.\n\n## Why craftsmen feel it harder\n\nI want to spend a moment on something specific, because I think it matters for anyone who has come up from a trade into management, and it does not get said enough.\n\nPeople who learn a craft for a living develop a particular relationship with the truth. A weld is good or it is not. A measurement is right or it is wrong. A part fits or it has to be cut again. There is no boardroom in which you can talk a bad weld into being a good weld. The metal does not care about your tone of voice, your relationships, or how busy you have been. The metal tells you, every time, exactly what you are.\n\nThat is a brutal teacher, and it is also a gift. It produces people who know, in their bones, the difference between *I did this work* and *I talked about doing this work*. It produces people who flinch, physically flinch, at bluster.\n\nThe problem is what happens when you put one of those people behind a desk.\n\nManagement work, especially in its first weeks, does not look like work to a tradesman. You sit in meetings. You read emails. You sign things. You ask people questions and write down their answers. At the end of the day there is no length of finished steel to point at. There is no part you can hand to the inspector. There is, instead, a feeling that you spent eight hours doing nothing while other people did real work, and that you are now being paid more for it than they are.\n\nThat feeling is the engine of imposter syndrome in a tradesman-turned-manager. It is not that you doubt your intelligence. It is that you have been trained, deeply, to distrust anything that does not leave a mark.\n\nThe first useful thing I learned in that office was that management *does* leave a mark. It just does not leave it on the work in front of you. It leaves it on the work in front of everyone else. A decision you made on a Tuesday morning shows up two months later as a project that came in on budget, or a person who stayed instead of leaving, or a near-miss that did not become an injury. The marks are real. You just have to learn to read them, and you have to be patient enough to wait for them to appear.\n\n## The first morning, in detail\n\nI want to tell you about that first morning properly, because I think the details matter more than the lesson.\n\nI had come in early. Earlier than I needed to, because I had not slept well and the house felt small. The car park was almost empty. I let myself in with the new access card they had given me, which felt slightly ridiculous, like a child\u0027s toy. The cleaners were finishing in the corridor. One of them, a woman I had passed for years on the shop floor, nodded at me in a way that was both warmer and more formal than it had been the week before. Word had got around. I was on the carpet side now.\n\nI sat down. I did not know what to do. There was no work in front of me in any sense I recognised. There were files in the cabinet from my predecessor, who had retired, and an email inbox that someone had pre-loaded with three hundred unread messages, most of which had nothing to do with me but had been copied to the position rather than the person. The phone rang once and stopped. I jumped slightly. I was grateful no one had seen.\n\nThe first thing I did, I am almost embarrassed to admit, was walk back out onto the shop floor.\n\nI had told myself I was going to do a round. Get the temperature of the place. Be visible. All of those phrases that managers use when what they actually mean is that the office is too quiet and they do not yet know how to be in it. I walked the bays. I greeted people. I asked one of the welders, a man I had served my apprenticeship near, how his daughter was. He told me. He was polite. He was also, very slightly, careful with me in a way he had not been careful the previous Friday, and I felt that carefulness like a draught under a door.\n\nThat was the moment, I think, that I understood the office was not a reward. It was a reassignment.\n\nThe people I had stood beside for half my working life were not going to stand beside me in quite the same way again. Not because they did not respect me — many of them, I think, did — but because the role had changed the geometry of the room. There was now a line between us that had not been there the week before, and we were both going to have to learn how to talk across it.\n\nI went back to the office. I closed the door, more deliberately this time. And I sat down to do the actual work, which was, as it turned out, almost entirely about other people.\n\n## What the craftsman brings to the desk\n\nThis is where the rest of the chapter has to earn its keep, because I do not want to leave you only with the feeling. I want to leave you with what to do about it.\n\nIf you are a tradesman, or a technician, or anyone who has come up through doing the work with your hands before being asked to do it with your signature, you bring three things to a management role that the people who arrived by a different route often do not have. I want you to know what they are, because on the mornings when the title feels borrowed, these are the things that are actually yours.\n\n### One. You know what real work feels like.\n\nYou have stood in heat. You have lifted things that were heavier than you. You have come home with your hands cut and your back sore and gone back the next morning. This means several things, all of which are useful behind a desk.\n\nIt means you can tell, with reasonable accuracy, when someone is telling you a job is harder than it is. You have done the job. You have a felt sense, not just a written sense, of what a fair day\u0027s output looks like.\n\nIt means you know the difference between a tired team and a lazy one. There is a difference. Tired teams need rest, food, or a problem solved upstream. Lazy teams need a different kind of conversation. Mistaking one for the other is one of the most common failures of new managers, and the trade protects you from it if you keep listening to it.\n\nAnd it means you have a built-in test for your own decisions. Before you sign a memo, before you change a process, before you announce a new policy, you can ask yourself a very simple question: *if I were still on the floor, what would I think of the person who just did this?* It will not always give you the answer you want. But it will almost always give you an honest one.\n\n### Two. You know what dignity costs.\n\nYou have been treated like a number. Most tradesmen have, at some point. You have been spoken to as if you were not in the room, by someone in a clean shirt who did not know your name. You remember exactly how that felt, and you remember exactly what it did to your willingness to go the extra mile that day.\n\nThat memory is worth more than any management course. It will not let you become the manager you used to complain about, provided you do not let yourself forget it. The day you stop remembering what it felt like to be on the other side of your own desk is the day you start becoming the kind of person you used to write off as out of touch.\n\nKeep the memory. Do not romanticise it. Just keep it.\n\n### Three. You know that the work is the point.\n\nThis sounds obvious. It is not, in management. Management has its own internal weather system of meetings, reports, politics, and performance theatre, and it is entirely possible to spend a year of your life being very busy inside that weather without ever actually moving the work forward. Many managers do. Some build whole careers out of it.\n\nYou will be tempted. The temptation looks different from the inside than I am making it sound. It is not lazy or cynical. It is, mostly, a slow drift towards the activities that other managers reward, because those are the activities your peers can see. The shop floor cannot see your strategy deck. The board cannot see your shift handover. So you start, almost without noticing, optimising for the audience that grades you rather than the work that pays everyone.\n\nYour trade is the antidote to this. You know, in a way that cannot be unlearned, that the work is the point. The bridge has to stand. The order has to ship. The team has to go home with their fingers. Everything else is in service of that, or it is in the way of it. If you can keep that lens, even one or two days a week, you will be a different kind of manager from the average. Not better at everything. But oriented correctly, which matters more.\n\n## Sitting with the discomfort\n\nI want to be honest about something, because I do not believe in the kind of business book that promises you a trick that makes a hard thing easy. The discomfort of that first office did not go away because I had a good attitude about it. It went away slowly, over months, and only because I did the work in front of me, badly at first and then less badly, until one morning I realised I had not thought about whether I deserved to be there in some weeks.\n\nThat is, in the end, the only real cure I know for imposter syndrome. Not affirmations. Not pep talks. Certainly not pretending. Just time, plus honest work, plus the willingness to be visibly bad at the parts of the new job you have not learned yet, in front of people who knew you when you were good at the old one.\n\nThat last bit is the hardest. A tradesman is used to being competent. You walked into that workshop and people knew, within a week, whether you could be trusted with a torch. You may have been junior, but you were competent. Becoming a manager means, briefly, being incompetent again. Not at the technical work — you can still do that better than most — but at the thing the role actually requires, which is making decisions about other people and other people\u0027s work, often with too little information, often under time pressure, and often with consequences you cannot fully see.\n\nYou will be bad at it for a while. There is no shame in this, but there is also no shortcut around it. The senior managers I most respected, looking back, were the ones who allowed themselves to be openly learning in their first year. They asked questions in meetings that they could have pretended to know the answers to. They said, *I have not done this before, walk me through it.* They were not weakened by this. They were trusted more for it, by anyone whose trust was worth having.\n\nThe ones who came in pretending to know everything had a harder time. Their teams clocked them within a fortnight. Tradesmen, in particular, can smell pretence at fifty paces. It is one of the gifts of the work. So if you are coming up from the floor, do not pretend. You will not get away with it among your own, and you will not respect yourself for trying.\n\n## A few practical things\n\nI am wary of turning this chapter into a checklist, because the truth of that first office was not a checklist. It was a feeling, and the feeling had to be lived through. But there are a handful of practical habits I wish someone had put in front of me on day one, so let me put them in front of you.\n\n- **Keep a notebook.** A paper one. Write down what you decided, what you promised, and what you noticed about people. Re-read it on Fridays. You will be amazed how quickly your own first impressions stop being available to you once the role has reshaped your view.\n- **Walk the floor at least once a day, with no agenda.** Not to inspect. Not to fix. Just to be in the place where the work is happening. The day you stop doing this is the day you start drifting, even if you do not feel it yet.\n- **Find one peer who is not in your reporting line and is honest with you.** Another manager at your level, a former colleague who has done this longer, someone outside the company entirely. You need a person who can tell you when you are being a fool, who will not lose anything by saying it.\n- **Block time on your calendar for thinking.** Two hours, twice a week, with the door closed. If you do not protect it, it will be eaten. Thinking is part of the job, and almost no one will treat it that way for you.\n- **Resist the urge to do the work yourself.** This will be the strongest pull of all, especially when something goes wrong on the floor and you can see, exactly, how you would fix it. Resist. Coach the person in front of you. Your job is no longer to make the part. Your job is to make the people who make the parts.\n\nThat last one took me the longest. I still feel the pull, on a hard day. Some part of me always will. But the role, properly done, asks you to step back from the metal and trust the hands you have trained. If you cannot do that, the office will eventually break you, because there is too much for one person to do and you are no longer one person — you are a multiplier, and a multiplier that insists on also being a single worker is just a tired worker with a bigger title.\n\n## The door, again\n\nI want to end where I started, with that door.\n\nA few years into the role, I had occasion to close it behind me on a difficult day. A project had gone sideways, a client was unhappy, a member of my team had made a decision I would not have made, and I needed five minutes to think before I responded. I closed the door. It made the same soft, carpeted click it had made on the first morning.\n\nThis time, it sounded different.\n\nIt did not sound apologetic. It sounded like a tool. A door, properly used, is part of the equipment of management. It is not a barrier between you and the work. It is a space where the work of thinking can happen without interruption, so that when you open it again, what comes out is considered rather than reactive. That, I had finally understood, was part of what the office was for.\n\nThe chair I sat in was, by then, mine. Not because anyone had granted it to me a second time, but because I had been the person in it long enough to have made a number of decisions, some good and some bad, that the place now bore the marks of. The marks were real. I had learned to read them.\n\nI do not want to overstate the transformation. Imposter syndrome does not vanish. It comes back at intervals — when the role grows, when the company changes, when a new and harder seat appears above you and you start the climb again. I will tell you, in a later chapter, about the day I was asked to take a seat I genuinely did not believe I was ready for, and how some of the same feelings came back almost unchanged. The voice does not leave. It just gets quieter, and you get better at recognising it for what it is: a habit of mind, not a diagnosis.\n\nIf you are sitting on the other side of an office door right now, with your name on the wrong side of it and a feeling in your chest that it is all a misunderstanding, I want you to do two things.\n\nFirst, do the work in front of you today. Not the work of proving you belong. Just the work. Answer the email. Take the meeting. Make the decision you have been putting off because you are afraid of getting it wrong. The fastest way out of the feeling is through it, and through it is paved with completed small tasks, not with breakthroughs.\n\nSecond, remember what you brought with you through the door. Hands that have done real work. A memory of being on the other side. An instinct for what is true that the metal taught you and that no amount of corporate weather can take away.\n\nThe door will keep making its soft little click. Let it. It is only a door. You are the person who decides what happens on either side of it now, and you have been preparing for this longer than you think.\n\n## What this chapter has been about\n\nIf I had to compress what I have just told you into a few lines for the apprentice version of myself, sitting in that chair on that first morning, it would be these:\n\n- The title is not a verdict on your worth. It is a description of where you have been placed in a system. Treat it as a job to learn, not a judgement to defend.\n- The discomfort you are feeling is not a sign that you do not belong. It is the natural friction of becoming competent at a new thing while still being competent at the old one. It will fade with use.\n- Your trade is not a thing you have left behind. It is the equipment you are bringing into the new role. Use it.\n- The work is still the point. Optimise for it, even when no one in the room is grading you on it. The grades that matter will arrive later, in the form of a team that stays, a job that ships, a place that runs well.\n- Be visibly learning. The people whose respect is worth having will respect you more for it, not less.\n\nAnd close the door behind you, when you need to. Quietly. On purpose. Like a tool.\n\nThat is the chapter. The next one is harder, because the next one is about what happens when something goes badly wrong and there is no manual on the shelf for it — and the office, with its clean desk and its swivelling chair, is exactly the place you have to sit and decide what to do anyway.\n"},{"id":"28cc2d0b-b4d6-4470-8908-94ecc801bb96","chapterNumber":13,"title":"Crisis Without a Manual","summary":"A major operational, financial, or human crisis where there was no playbook. Walk through the decisions made, what was lost, what was saved, and what only became clear in hindsight.","wordCount":0,"status":"Planned","contentMarkdown":null},{"id":"b3904d23-2513-42ff-886e-fc39e443a727","chapterNumber":14,"title":"Becoming Managing Director","summary":"The moment of taking the top operational seat. Reflect on what changes, what does not, and why arriving at the destination quietly raises the bar rather than ending the climb.","wordCount":0,"status":"Planned","contentMarkdown":null},{"id":"48820bbd-8255-43f2-97f9-978e32161f6e","chapterNumber":15,"title":"The Compass","summary":"Distil the principles the journey has produced into a usable compass for readers still on the floor or in the middle: a short, plain-spoken framework for showing up, leading, and lasting. Close with a charge to the next apprentice.","wordCount":0,"status":"Planned","contentMarkdown":null}],"characters":[]}
